
West Amwell Township, Hunterdon County, New Jersey
(extracted from the Internet)

BEGIN

History and Geology of West Amwell Township

"The last of the George Washington Boy Scout Camp moving out."  My husband
and I could not help grabbing a camera to capture a bit of history.
The location is at the corner of Goat Hill Road and George Washington Road.

Carol Wilson, Goat Hill Road

* *

Brief Overview:  The Delaware Indians had a path through the woods from
Lambertville through Mount Airy, Ringoes and Reaville to Newark upon which
the Old York Road was subsequently laid.  West Amwell Township was originally
part of Amwell Township which was formed in 1708 when Hunterdon County was
still part of Burlington County--West Amwell split from East Amwell in 1846.
Perhaps the most notable fact in West Amwell Township is that the new growth
has not replaced the old community charm.  Population: 2,251 (1990 census)
Area: 21.8 square miles

West Amwell Township: A Brief Early History

West Amwell was right in the middle of the early history of the United
States. A nice description was produced by Henrietta Van Syckle and Emily
Nordfeldt: Circa 1975.  Its forward stated the following:

By and for the people of West Amwell Township, from material gathered
and prepared in celebration of Hunterdon County's three hundredth year by
Henrietta Van Syckle and Emily Abbott Nordfeldt.

Introduction
Our West Amwell is the result of division and subtraction of lands and
boundaries that during the three centuries from 1664 to the present we will
briefly trace.

In 1664 King Charles II sent a successful force to drive the Dutch out of
the promising new world. He then made a grant of the territory taken from
the Dutch to his brother the Duke of York, who in turn conveyed it to Lord
John Berkley and Sir George Carteret on June 23,1664.

This new land was called Nova Caesarea or New Jersey to use the familiar
name. The two owners Berkley and Carteret agreed to pay one peppercorn as
rent if so demanded.

In 1672 Philip Carteret who was Governor of the province was forced to flee
because of an insurrection of the inhabitants and in the following year,
1673 the English and Dutch were again at war. This time the Dutch won
and New Jersey was claimed by them as a part of New York and placed under
Governor Andros.

In 1679 Carteret returned and was welcomed by the people in the Eastern part
of the province. Sir George Carteret received a second grant of land but
apparently the territory held by him and Berkley had already been divided
into East and West New Jersey. Berkley sold his interest to two Quakers,
John Fenwicke and Edward Byllinge for 1,000 pounds.  Byllinge in turn sold
to three Quakers, William Penn, Gawen Lawrie and Nicholas Lucas. These in
turn sold shares to others who also became proprietors.

July 1, 1676 a new line of division running from the East Side of Little
Egg Harbor straight north through the country to the utmost branch of the
Delaware marked East and West Jersey.

East Jersey was under the influence of Governor Andros of New York and
discontented with taxes, protests and discontent in West Jersey for the same
causes led to the abandonment of claims on the West by New York and East
Jersey. The claims of the trustees of  Byllinge and the heirs of Fenwicke
were established. When Sir George Carteret died in 1679 his will directed
that East Jersey be sold to pay his debts and the estate was bought by
William Penn and eleven others called proprietors.

As we are interested in West Jersey we will follow its development. In
1680 Byllinge commissioned Samuel Jennings as Deputy Governor and in 1681
an assembly convened to adopt a constitution and form of government for
West Jersey.

By the year 1701 neither East nor West had a good working government, and
on April 17, 1702 the rights of government returned to the English Queen
Anne. The Queen re-united East and West and placed them and New York in the
hands of Lord Cornbury. The new government was composed of the Governor
and twelve councilors named by the Crown and an assembly of twenty four
members to be elected by the people for an indefinite term.

Cornbury lost his commission in 1708 and after a couple of short term
Governors held office, Robert Hunter for whom our county is named served
for ten years 1710-1720. His administration seems to have been a wise
and good one. From 1720 to 1763 there were fifteen Governors all serving
as Royal Governors. The last Royal Governor was William Franklin, son of
Dr. Benjamin Franklin. As the agitation for independence of the colonies
increased he was opposed to such a step for New Jersey and his unpopularity
caused him to fear for his personal safety. When Independence was declared
July 17,1776 he was without authority and unpopular besides. He was arrested
and sent to Connecticut, from there he sailed to England.

The first Governor of the newly independent state was William Livingstone
and the state constitution was adopted July 2, 1776.  Trenton became the
state capitol in 1791 and it is interesting to note that the Capitol building
cost about 4,000 pounds. The Library established in 1804 was supplied with
168 volumes.

The years of the Revolution are filled with events and places familiar
to us all so we will continue by briefly tracing the origin of Hunterdon
County and so to West Amwell.

The Original People
The first owners of the land we now occupy were the Leni Lenape Indians
whose name means "The Original People."  Their tribal divisions in this part
of Hunterdon County were Turtle and Turkey. There were settlements just
South of Ringoes, at Mount Airy Station along the Alexhocken Creek and at
Rocktown. The name Delaware was given to Indians and River by early settlers.

New Jersey can boast that she is the only state in which every foot of
soil obtained from the Indians was gained by fair purchase and transfer.
Perhaps that is why we have no tales of horror in the early days that have
been handed down as local history.

Most of the lands were sold prior to the 1758 treaty with the Indians and at
that time all their titles were extinguished except for the right to fish
in all bays and rivers south of the Raritan and to hunt on un-inclosed
land. 3,000 acres were bought in Burlington for the resettlement of
Indians. About sixty Delawares were settled there and in 1802 were moved
again to New York State. Several years later they and the remnants of other
tribes were again moved to a location on the Fox River in Wisconsin. In
1832 the N.J. Legislature paid them $2,000 to relinquish their fishing
and hunting rights. We now see little or nothing to remind us of these
first settlers of West Amwell but we should think of them every time we
travel the Old York Road. It follows very much the same route that the
Indians used traveling from the Neshaminy in Pa. to their camps along the
Raritan. The settlement at or near present day Rocktown called WISHALMENSEY
had a trail leading to the WICHCHEOKE CREEK and that may have become the
Rocktown-Sergeantsville Stockton Road. Old records show that the trails
from the south passed through or near Mount Airy going to Ringoes where
trails from and to the north crossed one another. York Road was completed
in and followed to a great extent the original Indian trail Naraticong.

By reference to early records and maps we can locate West Amwell of the
present on early tracts bought by Winder, Stevenson, Bull, Wheeler and Calow
among others. These tracts were a part of 150,000 acres bought from the
Indians in 1703 for 700 pounds and sold in turn to various proprietors. This
was the beginning of divisions and sub-divisions.

John Reading was perhaps the first to buy large acreage and in John Holcombe
became owner of a large tract. It was his son Richard who was host to
General Washington at the time of the Revolution, in the house on the edge
of Lambertville and still known to us as Washington's Headquarters. Samuel
Holcombe another son of John Holcombe built a store and dwelling at Mount Airy
in 1743 on the earliest traveled route from the Delaware to the Raritan. It
is perhaps the oldest building still standing and in use in the Township.

Emanuel Coryell built the first storehouse in what is now Lambertville and
owned land along the river and on Goat Hill. At the time of the Revolution
Coryell's Ferry played an important part in the several crossings of
Washington and his troops.

We will not go into the period of the Revolution except to note that in
1778 Washington and his men numbering between 11 and 12 thousand with their
equipment crossed at Coryell's Ferry on the way to the Battle of Monmouth
fought on June 17, 1778. They broke camp at Valley Forge and between June
17 and 23 marched to the Delaware, crossed the ferry, marched through the
Township to Hopewell and camped there the night of the the 24th.

It was during the Revolution that General Washington who was staying at
Brownsburg, on the Pennsylvania side of the river, crossed to Jersey and was
taken to Goat Hill by Cornelius Coryell. Here he used "Washington's Rock"
as a point from which he made sure that his boats hidden on the Pa. shore
were so well hidden that spies sent by Cornwallis could not see them. There
is not even a suggestion that Washington ever slept there, but he is said
to have eaten a meal on "Washington's Dining Rock." On the same hill but
a little to the south stands Pinnacle Rock with a magnificent view up and
down the river and across to Pennsylvania.

We take our roads and modern transportation very much for granted now
and our complaints are loud and long but we have come a long way from
the old Indian Trail. It was in 1765 that the York Road was completed.
At about the same time the Swift-Sure Stage Line began to carry passengers
between Philadelphia and New York. Again we find Mount Airy of importance
as a stage stop. There are references to mud holes along the route so deep
that they were marked with poles set in the middle.  There were also men
and extra horses stationed at bad spots to pull the coach through. The
first scheduled service combining Ferry (Coryell's) and stage is recorded
for1769. The stage wagon became the stage coach and except for the period of
the Revolution the Swift-Sure carried passengers and mail until the Railroad
reached Somerville. Service between Lambertville and Flemington continued
until the building of the railroad, between those two points about 1854.

The Georgetown (old name for Lambertville) Franklin Turnpike leading through
the Township to New Brunswick was incorporated in 1816. Its opening followed
the building of the bridge at Lambertville in 1814 and as a toll road was
used extensively by farmers carrying produce to the river. The Toll Road
was not a moneymaker and in 1841 it became a public road.

Deeds and records found at Flemington show the building of numerous roads in
the Township. They were both public and private and were either abandoned
or taken over by the Township. West Amwell records show that in April 1851
it was decided that the York Road be kept free.

Every one takes the name of Mount Airy very much for granted without actually
knowing its origin. We would like to be able to prove a connection with Mount
Airy in Pennsylvania. That is located between Chestnut Hill and Germantown
and is mentioned in connection with the Battle of Germantown on October
4, 1777. It is possible that early travel and settlements by Quakers in
that area and this have a definite connection. It is also beyond doubt
that it is a high and "Airy" point in the Township. We can attest to the
latter as it was on a particularly windy day that we visited the old church
yard. It was in 1754 that the Second Amwell Church was established by early
Presbyterians who wanted to lessen the distance members had to travel to
the "First Church." The oldest decipherable stone we could find is dated
September 25, 1760 and marks an infant's grave. There are also stones bearing
the Ringo name dated 1776 and 1777. On some stones which may be even older the
inscriptions are no longer there. The loss of early church records makes them
impossible to trace unless there are family records available to descendants.

The old stone building in Mount Airy familiar to us all was built around
1743 by Samuel Holcombe son of John. The house next to it was a tavern which
served as a Stage Coach stop in the early days of the Swift-Sure Line. It
was bought by Solomon Holcombe in 1814 and turned into a dwelling, as such
it is now, occupied by the Runkles.

More About Mount Airy
In the search for the origin of the name Mount Airy we find its location
marked on a map dated 1777 as Amwell Meeting. The church is the only
site marked.

In 1795 it is marked Amwell /Mg H/ with the small symbol used to designate
a church. This map appears in an early Geography.

By 1828 a map shows a small group of buildings but no name at all which makes
us wonder if there was some doubt as to the proper name of the settlement.

Six years later in 1834 the same location is marked Amwell. But among the
road records in Flemington the laying out of the Rocktown Road in 1829 states
that after crossing certain lands the road was to go "To the road leading
from MOUNT AIRY to HARBERTOWN" and finally to the Trenton and Sussex Road
at Rocktown.

The next printed reference to Mount Airy that we have found appears in a
History published in 1844 and to quote, "Mount Airy, Rocktown, Snidertown
and Clover Hill contain each a few dwellings."

A map of Hunterdon published in 1851 locates our elusive settlement but
spells the name Mount Airy. This same spelling was carried over when the
map was republished in 1852.

West Amwell in Hunterdon County
Hunterdon County was named for General Robert Hunter a Royal Governor of
New York and New Jersey in the years from 1710 to 1720. For the troubled
period in which he lived his ten year term seems to have been a good one,
possibly because the men he chose to help his administration were men who
cared about the needs of the people they served.

The County went through a formation period being first a part of Monmouth
and Burlington Counties until 1713 when it was set off from Burlington by
an enactment of the Assembly. It originally included all or nearly all of
what are now Morris, Mercer, Warren and Sussex Counties.

Amwell was an original Township formed in 1708 when we were still a part
of Burlington and it became a Township in the new County of Hunterdon.
The name AMWELL seems to have been taken from Mount Amwell-the home of
John Reading who was probably our first land owner. He named his home in
memory of Amwell in Hertfordshire, England from which he had come to the
colonies. A more amusing if not accurate story of the name Amwell concerns
the brothers David and Jonathan Stout who used on meeting one another to say,
"I hope you are well, David" to be answered by "I am well Jonathan."

Amwell Township originally included Flemington. When Flemington became the
County Seat in 1785 it was located in Amwell. It remained so until 1838
when the Townships of Raritan, Delaware and Amwell were formed. At that
time Hunterdon yielded southern land to Mercer County.

We have at last arrived at the formation of */West Amwell Township/*. It was
formed from */Amwell/* by an act of the State Legislature, February 27,1846
and went through its last change in 1854 when "the portion of Ringoes which
lay in West Amwell S. of Old York Road and west of the road from Rocktown
to Ringoes Station was annexed to East Amwell."

The City of Lambertville was a part of West Amwell until 1848 and we share
a joint history from the earliest times. Washington's Headquarters was in
the Township originally and we still share pride in it.

Early residents of the Township were self sufficient. They raised sheep
for wool and there were plantings of flax for linen to be woven at home or
in a Lambertville mill. Grain was ground in local mills and surplus goods
exchanged for things not produced locally.

West Amwell's industries were those that catered to the needs of the local
people and were located on Alexauken Creek to make use of the water power. A
trip with the late Mr. and Mrs. Paul Holcombe began on the Old Mill Road
where traces of old dams and mill races are still to be seen. First came
a saw mill and flax seed mill run by Andrew Larason.  A bit further down
stream a dam and grist mill were located. The mills processing flax seed
often burned because they were so saturated with oil. There are the remains
of a dam on the Alfred Runkle farm Fackenthal. This dam supplied water for
the Jim Fackenthal grist mill of which there is now no trace. It opened in
November 1876.

The only mill now standing with its race is found across Rt. 202 on the
Western end of the Mill Road. This mill's specialty was buckwheat flour.
A wheelwright ran his shop on the creek where it now runs under Rt. 202.

A small home style industry remembered by Mr. Holcombe's grandfather was
that of Hedda Large who wove summer hats of rye straw, probably on order
and while her customers waited, as she lived in a remote spot.

Families used a portion of their own property to establish "Family burying
grounds" and there are several to be found locally. Johann Peter Rockefeller
an ancestor of the Rockefeller family was an early plantation owner. Although
a monument erected in 1906 by John D.  Rockefeller stands in the cemetery at
Larison's Corner, it does not mark the actual family ground, which is a half
acre set aside by will and mentioned in successive property transfers. It is
located on the original "Plantation" now owned by Mr. Irving Grace. Hunterdon
County maps of the 1850s show its location but it is seemingly forgotten
by the family and unknown to many of us. The late Mr. Edgar Hunt told of
family ground where slaves were buried near their masters. Their graves
were marked by small stone blocks rather than more elaborate stones. There
is also a spot where a number of "Guinea Negroes" are said to be buried,
victims of a cholera epidemic. Exact details are missing but we can guess
that it was the epidemic which raged in 1832 at the time the canal was
being built. There were many deaths and hasty burials at that time.

New Jersey was a slave owning state in spite of the contrary beliefs of the
Quakers and in 1798 there were 11,428 slaves in New Jersey, by 1860 there
were only 18 left in the state. The Hoagland family owned a farm on Rock
Road and were slave owners. The late William Lauderdale, a subsequent owner
of the property, testified that there were traces of slave cabin sites with
a few flowers still bravely coming up each year.  Slave owning was considered
desirable from a land owner's viewpoint for a bonus of acres of land was given
to a man who bought a slave above the age of 14. A barracks at Perth Amboy
housed the slaves brought to the country and they were bought from there. In
1820 a law was enacted which made every child born to slaves after July 4,
1804 free, males when they became 25, females at 21. This law and one in
1846 ended slavery in New Jersey well before the Civil War. Old records show
that Thomas Wilson who had been a slave owned considerable land in Amwell,
but having been a slave he could not will it and it was sold at public sale.

1864
One hundred years ago we were in the midst of the Civil War. The Township
records show how deeply we were involved and the constant need for money.

In 1861 a private soldier received $13 a month and in 1864 it had been raised
to $16 a month. Pay day was sometimes six months late and there were many
problems for families left behind. The Draft of August 1862 had disappointing
results and in 1863 a more severe law was enacted and on August 8,1863
there was a special Township meeting at The Public House of John Stevenson,
Mount Airy where the raising of a Bounty was discussed. This money was to be
paid to volunteers for military service.  The following week they met again
to consider raising $200 for each volunteer and hoped the County would pay
most of it with the Township making up the balance. In December it was voted
to levy a Poll Tax of $2 a man to make up a bounty of $400 for each volunteer.

In 1864 the quota of men from the Township was 22 and there were 120 men
liable to draft. In May a bounty of $300 was voted for each man accepted in
the service, the money was to be assessed and collected as State and County
taxes. The Committee was authorized to borrow the money and Poll Tax of $5
was levied on every man single or married. In August 1864 it was agreed that
every man liable to the Draft should pay $20 Poll Tax within 10 days to the
Township Collector. Each man drafted or accepted as a volunteer or placing a
substitute to the credit of the Township would receive a bounty of $425 for
the 3 year period of service. Those who did not pay the $20 would receive
no benefits. The ledger showing the $20 payments records one man as paying
only $16. There were two more meetings in August concerned with the bounty
and the sum was raised to $550 or $600 if needed. There didn't seem to be
enough money in any case and on April 3,1865 the Township borrowed $15,940
from 22 men to defray these heavy costs. Those whose ancestors were draftees
and volunteers doubtless know of the hardships of the families left at home
and the men in the service.

Records of Township meetings for the period from 1849 through the War tell
of the constant need for money. In 1864 there were 269 scholars enrolled in
the West Amwell Schools and the sum of $1 per pupil was allowed for school
purposes. By 1870 $2 was needed and a glance at the newest school budget
will certainly bring home the fact that times have changed in 100 years.

West Amwell farmers had large herds of sheep and old records again show
bills for sheep killed. In earlier times there were panthers and wild cats
to blame but in 1864 the blame probably rested on sheep-killing dogs and in
that year the Township paid $265.50 to various owners whose sheep were killed.

Mail Delivery
Mail delivery in the Township first depended on the Stage Coach drivers
who carried messages which went out of Trenton after 1730 when a P.O. was
established there. During the Revolution service was disorganized and people
traveled to Trenton to receive mail from England and to send messages
abroad and to the other parts of the Colonies. In 1794 a Federal Postal
Law was passed and thereafter new offices were established in Lambertville
and Ringoes. The mails were slow and expensive, in 1831 it cost 6¢ to send
one thin sheet of paper 30 miles with payment made to the coach driver. It
wasn't until 1847 that stamps (prepaid) came into use. Rocktown had a P.O. as
did Mount Airy and after the R.R. was built mail was put off the train at
the Mount Airy station and carried on "The Queen's Road" to the P.O. Rural
delivery was established in 1905 in Hunterdon with one route from Flemington
and one from Stockton. The Township's first Rural Carrier was Jim Wilson.

Taverns
The Taverns were important in the early days as public meeting places and
stop overs for travelers. Mount Airy was a stage stop on the SwiftSure
Line. When we became a Township in 1846 the first Township meeting was held
at the "Inn of John Menagh in the Village of Mount Airy." In April of each
year an election was held for public offices, money collected and spent for
items ranging from care of the poor to building and repair of roads. In 1815
notices for a meeting to consider building a road were ordered posted in
"the three most public places in the Township of Amwell, Pidcock's Tavern
at Georgetown, Hoppock's Tavern and WyLoff's at Rocktown."

Rocktown
Rocktown is frequently mentioned in early Amwell history, first as the
probable site of an Indian village and later as having a store, a tavern and
later a P.O. It was there that a Confederate flag is said to have been flown
during the Civil War, one of two places in the County showing such sympathies.

Rocktown has behaved in a much more sedate manner appearing when and where it
should on early maps and in books of early days. In a Gazetter of the state
of New Jersey which was published in we read the following: "Rock/own-Small
Hamlet of Amwell Township-Hunterdon County, mi. S. of Flemington, contains
tavern, store and some or dwellings. It lies in the pass through the Rock
Mountain and is named for the abundance of large rocks around it."

Although it does not equal the founding date of the Second Annual Church
"Old Rocks Methodist Church" was built in 1843 and stands in its shaded
yard with the graves of the early members close beside it.

For those interested in our past visits to the cemeteries at Old Rocks,
Mount Airy, Larason's Corner and best of all Pleasant Ridge will make it
all seem very real. The names on the stones are so familiar and reading
them makes our History vivid and personal.

Texas
The trouble between Mexico and the U.S. which ended in the annexation of
Texas in 1845 must have caught the imagination of the people living in that
period...There is a document which refers to Wilkinson Holcombe (commonly
called Texas) and a house known as "Little Texas", having been built for a
daughter of the family when she married. Farmers referred to their grazing lad
as "Texas'' and there is a portion of un-used land still called by that name.

Pirate's Treasure
The late Harry Holcombe at the age of 93 rewarded visitors to his cottage on
Goat Hill with delightful stories of the past. One tale concerns a Pirate
who is said to have buried a fortune somewhere on Goat Hill Road. He fled
from New York, crossed New Jersey, chose the spot to hide his money and was
caught and hung in Mercer County, without revealing the hiding place. It
is said to have been between two great oaks whose shade met at noon.

West Amwell in the Scientific World
A small item in The Beacon for September 1, 1876 commented on the fact that
many people were visiting The Observatory on Goat Hill. Naturally we wondered
where the Observatory had been and what they went to see. In another issue
of The Beacon we found that The U.S. Coast Survey was establishing signal
stations in New Jersey and Pennsylvania to use in making topographical
surveys and maps and to establish latitude and longitude of certain
points. Our tower station was on the "southerly crest of Goat Hill", on
lands of Mr. William Bainbridge. He was an ancestor of the late Mrs. Marion
Mullholland who lived on Goat Hill all her life. The total height of the
tower was given as 495 feet based on sea level calculations and its platform
was 37 feet. It was reported that a marvelous view was to be had for many
miles in all directions.  Unfortunately there was very heavy smoke reported
for the Lambertville area that September and we imagine some disappointment
among the people who climbed the tower. There were other towers in New Jersey
and the line extended to Doylestown and Newtown, Pennsylvania.  Our modern
maps use information gained from the observations made from these towers.

In March of 1876 there was an eclipse of the sun visible all over the United
States and in August the Planet Venus created an "Astronomical Event" when
at 4 A.M. on the 18th it approached "a star of the 4th magnitude" a mere
40,250,000 miles away. We like to think that Goat Hill offered a fine view
of these events and that observers made the climb with somewhat the same
feeling of wonder that televised launchings from Cape Canaveral now give us.

The Sporting Life
The Music Circus is not the first amusement area in the Township according
to The Beacon of September 14, 1877 "The First Exhibition of The Delaware
Valley Farmer's and Mechanics Agricultural Society" opened its fair. The Fair
Grounds were located on the present James Lambert farm and featured a l/2 mile
track, grand-stand, stables and space for exhibitors of hand work, produce
and live stock. The Fair opened on a Tuesday with poor attendance because
of bad weather. However, on Thursday the attendance was reported as between
8,000 and 10,000 with visitors coming by train and carriages. We quote that
"the horse department was very full, in which could be found many fast nags
of good blood." In 1880 the fourth Fair drew even more horses and there was
"a grand Cavalcade of Horses and Military:' Twelve of Boozer's Cadets gave
an exhibition drill. These cadets were boys organized by J. Fennemore Boozer
of Lambertville and trained in drill by a veteran of the Civil War. In this
1880 Fair a local horse Ben Bolt owned by Andrew Holcombe won his race,
beating his mother Black Maria to do so. Other reminiscences of the Fair
Grounds include the use of "Devilina Whistles" by the cheering section and the
fact that the grounds were used for live bird shoots until such meets became
illegal. Birds escaping the guns of the paying customers became free to the
crowd of bystanders when they flew beyond a certain point. There was even
a bar license for race meets. The track was popular with local drivers of
fast horses and they held friendly competitions among themselves on Sundays
(all after church we hope). In later years the oval became a truck garden
remembered by "boys" who worked there and to relieve the boredom of picking
peas used to jog around the track. When James Lambert's grandfather bought
the farm he brought in Indian boys from Carlisle, the college for Indians
in Pennsylvania, to do summer farm work. They too used to trot around the
track. The grand-stand was taken down, the barns along York Road burned
one snowy night and the track itself was plowed under.

The late Mrs. Lambert, the Grandmother of Mrs. Stanley (Cora) Matthews who
is her namesake, remembered "Fair Time" of her *childhood days *when she was
Cora Larason. For the children it was a time to ride the merry-go-around,
see circus acts, pet the colts and calves in the stock show and best of all
eat the enormous meal packed into the wagon with the family. The various
family groups met to eat together and she remembered that often some unlucky
family would find that the "chicken dinner" had been stolen from a wagon
and the losers would then share the meal prepared by generous friends. In
those days of hearty appetites and bountiful provisions there was no doubt
plenty for all. She also remembered the blacksmith shop the wheelwright and
chair maker who did business on Alexauken Creek at Herring Point where the
creek now passes under York Road.

Among the bits and pieces of information we learn that Ed Larue was the
last man in the Township to drive oxen; that Tom Hunt developed a variety of
strawberries called "The President" which needed only 11 berries to fill a
quart basket; that brick yards in the Township supplied building material
used locally; that paving blocks were quarried from our bountiful supply
of rock and that the blasting powder used for the quarrying was stored in
a shack just off the Georgetown-Franklin Turnpike.

A Letter in the Beacon

West Amwell, March 1, 1876
Mr. Editor: The Commonwealth of West Amwell has been engaged in a disgraceful
little law suit for the last two years, all about a small road drain and
what has it amounted to? Echo answers, a nice heap of cost for the Twp. to
pay. What next? Why the Town Committee by order we presume, of the illegal
adviser has entered a caves against the new road which was recently laid
out through Mr. Hall's place. The road has long been needed and will be
considered a public necessity.

Evening Star

A portion of a letter to The Beacon, March 17, 1876 concerning moving
the Capitol from Mount Airy to the center of the Township. "So we think
the Township will stand a little while yet, whether the road through Mr.
Hall's property becomes permanent or not. Or whether the Capitol is moved or
not; and as for Mount Airy we have no fears. While she has the Town Clerk,
1 of the Town Committeemen, Judge of Elections, Freeholder, Collector,
either in or near the vicinity we think she is safe.

Commodore

Mini-Walking Tour of Mount Airy
Historic sites are abundant throughout West Amwell Township. One concentration
of historically and architecturally interesting structures occurs in the
area known as Mount Airy and is an excellent example of a nineteenth century
agricultural service community which still retains much of that character. To
view these outstanding buildings (none are open to the public), the following
map may be used as a guide for this mini-walking tour. Vehicles may be left
in the parking lot at the West Amwell Township Municipal Building, indicated
as number one on the map.  On foot one would proceed north to number two,
following the numbers in sequence to number sixteen which is adjacent to
the parking lot and ends the tour. The tour will take about fifty minutes,
walking at a leisurely pace.

Mount Airy Cemetery Annex.

A cluster of headstones and small stone blocks mark the graves of some blacks
who had lived in West Amwell. This roadside plot, next to the parsonage,
includes the resting place of Elijah Moore who died in 1866 and served as
a private in the Civil War, 1864-65, and that of Prime Moore who died in
1898 at the age of 81 years.

Mount Airy Cemetery.

Directly to the south of the church, the cemetery is bordered by a low stone
wall with wrought iron gate. It has been in use since the mid-eighteenth
century and includes headstones marked as early as 1760.

Second English Presbyterian Church of Amwell.

A Gothic Revival structure with a tall, slate octagonal spire and point
arched and triangular gable windows. The congregation dates to 1754,
however the present church, the second to be built, was erected in 1874. A
parchment dated 1786 is still in existence which recorded the swearing of
church trustees renouncing ties to the King of Britain.

The Mathews House.

A simple gable front, one story frame building with molding surround at the
central front entry. Built in 1876, replacing an earlier octagonal school,
it was used as a township school until 1954. Owned by the church, it has
been remodeled, dedicated to township residents Cora and Stanley Mathews
and is now used for church school classes and other activities.

Dwelling.

A frame building, five bay H type with gable end chimneys, clapboard siding
and built-up box cornice with brackets. The three bay porch is supported by
wooden posts on pedestals with foliated gingerbread.  Built circa 1860-73,
it shows Italianate and eclectic Victorian influences. With a garage/wagon
shed and English barn outbuildings.

Runkle's Corner Farm.

Farm outbuildings composed of: 1) a two story wagon house with gable end
entries, built-in corn cribs on the side walls, overhanging eaves and
clapboard siding. 2) a small frame English barn with shed appendages on
the west gable end and a modern stable ell perpendicular to the southeast
corner. Built circa 1850-1890, the Runkle's have in their family a table
which incorporates a board found here with the date 1852 incised on it.

Storehouse. (Presently a dwelling).

A sandstone, two and a half story, gable roofed, three bay structure built
in the late eighteenth century. It still retains the overhanging gable
hoist complete with pulley and rope which surmounts the west gable-end
principal facade. Probably the only storehouse of this kind remaining in
the county. Farmers used such community storehouses to store their farm
products until spring when they could be carted to the Delaware River
and floated during the high water season down to Philadelphia and other
coastal markets.  This structure also served as a general store for many
years, as it was noted in "Rural Hunterdon" by Hubert G. Schmit that the
"Holcombe store was charging only fifty cents per bushel of plaster in 1824"
and in January 1869, ''Solomon Holcombe paid three cents each for eggs."

Mount Airy Tavern. (Presently a dwelling).

A frame, four bay building with west gable-end chimney with overhanging
eaves and gable dormers. Built prior to the Revolutionary War, this house
was enlarged and remodeled in the Craftsman style in this century and
renovated again more recently.  It is one of the oldest and one of the few
remaining taverns or stage houses of Revolutionary War days. At one time
it was connected with the adjacent stone storehouse. In 1814 the tavern
was converted into a private dwelling.

Mount Airy Tavern. (Presently a dwelling).

A classic five bay, two story frame building, gable roofed, with clapboard
siding and a porch running across the front. Circa 1817-36, possibly
earlier. A successor to the tavern directly opposite on the Old York Road,
it also served as both a tavern and a stage house. It appears to have
remained a hostelry for some years as when the New Jersey State Legislative
Act creating West Amwell Township was passed in 1846, it was specified that
the new municipality's first town meeting was to be held at John Managh's
Inn in Mount Airy.

Acknowledgements

Mrs. Van Syckle co-authored with Mrs. Emily Abbott Nordfeldt a brief history
of our Township which was included in a Report to the Taxpayers in 1963.

Henrietta Van Syckle was one of the original members of the West Amwell
Environmental Commission when it was first established. She devoted much
time and enthusiasm to the Commission over the years, but perhaps her
greatest contribution was her special knowledge and interest in the sites
and structures that are historically important in the Township.

The Environmental Commission produced and dedicated this revised edition
of an earlier Report in memory of Henrietta Van Syckle and Emily Nordfeldt.

The brochure was transformed to this computer file in 1997, by Fred H.
Bowers, Ph.D., the grandson of Marion Mulholland (spelling corrected) (nee
Harbourt), mentioned in the section "West Amwell in the Scientific World."

END

