Posted into NePa Ancestors by:
Phyllis Fisher
Hoofish1@yahoo.com 

Sent: Thu, April 15, 2010 5:46:45 PM
Subject: Name Origins of Northeast PA Towns

Name Origins of Northeast PA Towns
________________________________

The Abingtons
Many of the early settlers in this region came from New England, drawn
by the promise of better farmlands. They often carried a title or deed
granting them parcels of land, and occasionally a parcel would conflict
with another landowner's title. These conflicts eventually led to a series
of wars between Pennsylvania and Connecticut settlers.

Around 1794, one Colonel Ebbington, a land agent from Connecticut, granted
land titles to settlers from Connecticut and Rhode Island. Titles were to
an area known informally as Beechwoods, and as these settlers arrived,
they named the area Ebbington, in honor of the colonel.

But over the next few years, as Pennsylvania authorities increasingly
challenged any Connecticut claims, the value of the Yankees' titles
diminished, as did Colonel Ebbington's popularity. So in 1806, Ebbington
became Abington, the similar sounding name taken from a small Connecticut
settlement.

The Abingtons of this region bear no direct relationship to the Abington
north of Philadelphia, named by settlers from Abington, Massachusetts.


Allentown
Allentown was originally part of Northampton County and originally known
as Northampton. Eventually Lehigh County emerged out of western sections
of Northampton County, and in 1838 the town was named for William Allen,
an early chief justice of Pennsylvania.


Archbald
Linking regional coal mines to the New York area, the Delaware & Hudson
Canal Company played a prominent role in the development of the Lackawanna
Valley and in the naming of its towns. Archbald was named in 1846 for James
Archbald, a senior mechanical engineer on the D&H. Prior to this, Archbald
was known as White Oak Run.


Ashley
At times known as Coalville and Scrabbletown, Ashley has also been known
by names such as Peestown, Nanticoke Junction, and even Skunktown. In the
last century Ashley was named after the wealthy Herbert Henry Ashley of
Wilkes-Barre.


Asylum (also known as French Asylum or French Azilum)
Located near Wyalusing, this town was established as a possible asylum
for French aristocracy and royalty in case they needed to high-tail it out
of Paris during those revolutionary years around 1787. The French city folk
who came here to lay the groundwork for the king apparently couldn't handle
the rustic hardships, and eventually most of them made it back to France,
though some structures and artifacts still remain.


Avoca
Once known as Pleasant Valley, Avoca took its name from the valley
town of the same name on the southeast coast of Ireland. I don't know the
full story, but apparently there was a deliberate irony to the choice of
Avoca. In the last century, there was a popular poem entitled "The Sweet
Vale of Avoca," which may have discussed the wretched lives beneath a
facade of happiness in this Irish town. Other folks mention the role of a
disasterous 1888 train wreck (The Mud Run Disaster) that killed 29 Pleasant
Valley residents, thus prompting the more somber name. Regardless, Avoca
is one of several Pennsylvania towns whose name came from Europe. These
days Avoca is home to the only airport in the world named backwards (the
so-called "Wilkes-Barre"/Scranton Airport), which may be the reason we lost
the local bureau of the National Weather Service. Update on Avoca: Although
the "Vale of Tears" story has circulated for years, there are some informed
folks who believe the whole thing is a myth, so take it with a grain of
salt. One reader adds that Avoca in Gaelic means "where the waters meet."


Bald Mountain
Curious names in this part of the state are not limited to towns. Take
Bald Mountain. The summit of Bald Mountain, to the west of Scranton, is
known for its gusty winds that help prevent the thick growth of trees. As
a result, the top of the mountain has a distinct "bald spot."


Bellevue
One of several unofficial sectional nicknames in Scranton, such as Bull's
Head and Bunker Hill, the Bellevue section of West Scranton takes its name
from the French for "beautiful view." Indeed, today in Bellevue you can
get a beautiful view of Hackie's Bar.


Bethlehem
If the humble author of this page has his facts correct, Moravian College
was established in Bethlehem in 1807, making it one of the oldest colleges
in the United States. (Steve O'Boyle of Avoca found information that suggests
the college was founded in 1742, making it the sixth-oldest in America.) This
Moravian influence was felt throughout the Lehigh Valley area for much of the
century and probably exists today to some extent, and of course is seen in
the name Bethlehem. According to "The History of Northampton County," the
name dates back to Christmas Eve of 1741. In that year, the leader of the
Moravians, on a visit from Germany, was spending some time visiting the log
home constructed by Moravian missionaries. With great emotion that night, the
bishop entered an adjoining stable and sung these lines from a German hymn:
"Not from Jerusalem, but Bethlehem Cometh that which helpeth me." From that
time on, the story goes, the region was referred to as Bethlehem.


Benton
Benton, Columbia County, was named in 1838 for Thomas Benton, a nationally
popular senator from Missouri. Senator Benton almost killed Andrew Jackson
in an 1813 duel, though he later supported Jackson in his successful
1828 presidential campaign. Benton himself was occasionally encouraged
by politicians and newspapers to run for president, but he never showed
any interest.


Berwick
Religious persecution in the 18th century did not confine itself to
Europe. The Quakers in particular suffered persecution both in England and
in the New World. 'Quaker' itself was once a derisive term, referring to
expressive mannerisms seen during services of the Society of Friends, as
they are formally known. Founded in 1786 as a place of religious refuge,
Berwick was named by Quakers from Berwick-upon-Tweed, a coastal town in
northeastern England.


Black Walnut
Nearby rivers and creeks have led to many town names. Black Walnut,
for example, near Meshoppen on Route 6, was once a settlement called Black
Walnut Bottom, owing to the black walnut often found covering the bottom
of the nearby creek.


Blakely
Named to honor Captain Johnston Blakely, a naval hero in the War of
1812. Blakely was lost at sea around 1814. The name means "black lea" or
"black pasture."


Bloomsburg
Originally known as Eyersburg, then Eyertown, for Ludwig Eyer who laid out
the town in 1802. The town was incorporated in 1870 as Bloomsburg by Samuel
Bloom, a county commissioner. Technically speaking, Bloomsburg is the only
town in Pennsylvania. No other municipality has this official designation. But
this just in: A reader from the Erie area says that Presque Isle, PA may
also officially be a town. We'll put the detectives on this one immediately.


Bradford
Located in northwest PA, Bradford was named in 1850 by Daniel Kingsbury,
who bought 50,000 acres of a region then known as Littleton. Kingsbury's
family originally came from Bradford, England.


Brooklyn
Settlers from coastal cities often brought their city's name
westward. Brooklyn, near Montrose, is our best local example.


Bulls Head
I've never heard a definitive explanation for the name of this North
Scranton neighborhood, though it may stem from an old slaughterhouse once
located there. Note that the convenience store at the corner of Main and
Wood has a plastic bull's head on the storefront.


Carbondale
In the early 1800s, Carbondale was the remote site of several unsuccessful
mining attempts. By 1820, however, Hudson officials took a new interest in
the abandoned shafts and directed workers, as an obscure memo is rumored
to attest, to carry tools and supplies to the "dale (valley) where carbon
was found."


Chinchilla
Once known as Leach's Flats, for Ephraim Leach who settled here around the
year 1801. Sometime between 1880 and 1890 the female postmaster of Leach's
Flats felt the need to rename the village. She chose Chinchilla, and the
story goes that she named the town in honor of her cherished chinchilla shawl.
This needs to be verified, but there is probably a Leach Street in Chinchilla
even today.


Clarks Summit
In 1799, Deacon William Clark cleared a triangular piece of land at
the now-familiar summit. The cleared parcel was referred to as a 'green,'
hence Clarks Summit and Clarks Green.


Clifton Twp.
Like Covington, listed next, Clifton Township helps demonstrate the
lasting influence of Henry Drinker. In addition, Clifton Township is one of
the few municipalities in this area that bears someone's first name. (The
only other name that comes to mind at this time is Lake Winola.) Located
in the Gouldsboro area, Clifton Twp. is so-named because Clifton is the
first name of Henry Drinker's son.


Colver
Located in S.W. PA (Cambria Country), what's unique about Colver is that
a neighboring town is called Revloc -- which is 'Colver' spelled backwards.


Covington
Covington was once part of a vast stretch of beech trees, extending
eastward from Scranton, known as Drinker's Beeches - the same Drinker who
so kindly lent his name to Drinker Street in Dunmore, a street that takes
you straight into the former Drinker's Beeches.

Covington takes its name from Brigadier General Leonard Covington of
Maryland, who fought and died in the War of 1812.


Cresco
Whether intended or not, Cresco in the Poconos is Latin for "I am growing."


Daleville
Daleville is also part of the former Drinker's Beeches, named for the
early landowner Henry Drinker, a major figure in the development of the
Lackawanna Valley. The name Drinker's Beeches originated around 1805,
and Daleville comes from David Dale, who arrived from England in 1819 and
bought land from Drinker at $5 per acre.


Dallas
Dallas was named after a popular Philadelphia lawyer (and possibly the
last), named Alexander James Dallas, secretary of the treasury from 1814
to 1817.


Dalton
The Bailey family settled in this part of Abington township around 1801,
and the area took on the name Bailey Hollow. Hollow, by the way, means
'small valley.' In their book "Clarks Summit: A Narrative," Helen and
John Villaume of Clarks Summit recalled the story behind the name change:
In the late 1860's, Dr. J.C. Miles of Bailey Hollow, among others, felt
that the name sounded unbecoming for a town of increasing prominence. The
railroad would soon choose whether to run through Bailey Hollow or Waverly,
and locals felt the 'hollow' name might chase the rail line away.

Dr. Miles chose the new name in 1871 after a visit from Dr. Edward
Dalton, a civil war surgeon and superintendent of the New York City Board
of Health. The Scranton press praised the named change and encouraged
Tunkhannock to consider a similar move.


Danville
Once called Dan's Town, Danville originally sprung up as a settlement
around General Dan Montgomery's store and his father's grist mill (for
grinding grain) in the early 1800s.


Dauphin County
Dauphin is the hereditary title of the eldest son of the French king.


Delaware
The river and the state take their name from Lord de la Warre, Governor
of the English colony of Virginia. The Delaware Indians, originally the
Leni or Leni-Lenape, were first met along the Delaware River, and thus
their name.

The influence of the Delaware Indian language is still felt today. Its
word hanna, meaning 'river,' is seen in the words Lackawanna, Susquehanna,
Tobyhanna, Tunkhannock, and Pocono (Poco-hanna).


Dickson City
Named for the wealthy and popular Thomas Dickson, president of the D&H
Railroad from 1869 to 1884.


Dorrance
Named after Colonel George Dorrance, who fell in the Wyoming Massacre.


Drums
Several Pennsylvania towns take their names from taverns, which functioned
more as rest stops in their day. Drums today sits near the site of the Abram
Drum's Tavern, which opened north of Hazleton in 1790. For its first few
years, in fact, the town was spelled Drum's.

Another tavern town is Bird-in Hand, between Philadelphia and Lancaster. A
swinging wooden sign on an old tavern there reminded patrons that " A bird
in hand is worth two in the bush."

Another early tavern near what is now King of Prussia originally was
run by a Prussian settler, and its wooden sign featured the image of King
Frederick the First. Frederick ruled Prussia from 1701 to 1713 as it rose
from a province into a kingdom.


Dunmore
The naming of Dunmore is the result of a smooth bribe gone for naught. The
year was 1838, and Dunmore was then known as Bucktown, named for its abundant
deer herds. A young Englishman, Charles Augustus Murray, had spent several
weeks that year fishing and hunting around old Bucktown. During this time,
several local railroad men befriended Murray and learned of his father, a
wealthy English nobleman - the Fifth Earl of Dunmore. The railmen persuaded
Chuck to return home to borrow $1.5 million from dear old dad; the money
would help finance a rail link from here to New York.

Ever pure in their motives, the railmen discarded the name Bucktown
in favor of Dunmore, out of deference, no doubt, to the Earl's inherent
magnificence. Unfortunately it appears the Earl was less than impressed -
Charles never returned. He was sent off instead to diplomatic chores in
Persia, and the name "Bucktown" slowly faded away, though high school teams
are still called The Bucks.


Dupont
The wealthy du Pont family of Wilmington, Delaware owned a gunpowder
plant here toward the end of the last century. This is the same family
whose company has grown into today's giant Du Pont Chemical interests and
whose descendents include former presidential candidate Pierre du Pont,
as well as the whack-job convicted of murder.

The Encyclopedia of Pennsylvania tells an amazing little tale of one
famous Dupont resident, Faustin Wirkus. Wirkus joined the Marines in 1915,
the story goes, so he could quit his job as a breaker boy. He was first
sent to Haiti and later to the neighboring island of La Gonave. Toward the
island's interior lived 10,000 natives who practiced voodoo and polygamy,
and not necessarily in that order.

Years earlier, a deposed tribal ruler named Faustin predicted the future
coming of a second Faustin who would rule the land. Young Faustin Wirkus
soon became king, and 10,000 loyal natives worshiped this breaker boy from
Dupont. The Marines, however, were not impressed and they quickly yanked
Faustin out of there.


Duryea
Home to immigrants from a variety of European countries, Duryea was
at times referred to as Babylon, for its 'babel' of languages, and also
as Marcy. Indeed, a Marcy Street still exists here, and there may at one
time have been a Babylon Breaker. It was eventually named for Abram Duryea,
a mine speculator from New York.


Easton
It appears that Thomas Penn, son of William, named Easton in honor
of his uncle, the Earl of Pomfret. The Good Earl resided in England's
Northamptonshire district, so it's no coincidence that Easton is located in
Northampton County. Back in Northamptonshire, the Earl resided either in the
town of Easton Neston, or else that was the name of his estate. Regardless,
the Earl pulled a double-whammy when it came to name origins in the Lehigh
Valley.


Edwardsville
Named after Daniel Edwards, superintendent of the Kingston Coal Company.


Eighty-Four
The town that gives us 84 Lumber. The best explanation is that this town
is so named because it was incorporated in 1884.


Elmhurst
Gilbert Dunning bought land here from Henry Drinker in 1847, and the area
became known as Dunning through the 1880's. Its name was then changed to
the pastoral-sounding Elmhurst in hopes of stimulating land sales. 'Hurst',
an obscure and perhaps obsolete English word meaning 'knoll' or 'dell', comes
from the Old High German for 'forest,' so Elmhurst simply means 'Elm Forest.'


Erie
Erie means 'raccoon.' The Erie tribe is sometimes referred to as the
Cat Nation, the raccoon being a wild cat that appears as the main figure
on the Erie totem pole. Early French maps of North America refer to Lake
Erie as Lac du Chat - "The Lake of the Cat."


Exeter
This name was brought by settlers from Exeter, Rhode Island, which was
named by settlers from Exeter, England. Exeter, in the southwest of England,
is a city on the River Exe, located northeast of Plymouth, which lies at
the mouth of the River Plym, hence the name Plym-Mouth.


Eynon
Named for a Welshman, Thomas Eynon, who developed mines in the midvalley,
became a prominent Scranton resident, and is not in Eynon any more.


Factoryville
In the 1820s, people came from miles around to have their wool woven
into cloth at the factory there, and thus the name.


Falls
Here's a good example of how various towns took their names from nearby
geographic features. Formed in 1824, this Wyoming County township, halfway
between Tunkhannock and Pittston, takes it name from nearby Buttermilk Falls,
near the mouth of Falls Creek.


Fleetville
An early landowner here, James Van Fleet, once bought a standard wooden
plow, but he didn't like the way it performed. So he fashioned his own more
effective plow, and soon the new 'Van Fleet'-style plow started catching
on like crazy with local farmers. The plow is long gone, but the name remains.


Forest City
In 1885, Forest City was little more than a lumber camp called
Pentecost, named for its founder William Pentecost. The lumbermen often
went into thriving Carbondale for supplies by day and diversion by night.
Apparently a group from the lumber camp walked into Carbondale one day,
and someone remarked, in effect, "Where on earth are you from?" They looked
at each other, then one of the bright ones spoke up, "We're from 'Forest'
city." The name stuck, and in 1888 the town officially took on this name.


Forty Fort
Many people can tell you this town is named for 40 of the earliest settlers
in the region. But where did they come from? From Connecticut, in 1769.


Frackville
Founded by Daniel Frack, no known relation to Frick.


Freeland
Apparently much of the land in the Hazleton area a hundred years ago
was owned by mining interests, though one stretch of land did open up for
cultivation. In order to foster its development, someone had the bright
idea to call the place Freehold, that is until the post office said, "Time
out. We already have a Freehold in New Jersey." So the name was changed to
Freeland, to advertise the Free (available for sale) Land.


French Asylum / Azilum -- see Asylum


Gibson
Named around 1812 for Judge John Bannister Gibson, a chief justice of
the Pennsylvania Supreme Court, a position you don't want to hold today
if you take minor concepts like 'integrity' seriously. For a short time,
this town midway between Scranton and Binghamton was referred to as "Five
Partners," for the original five families who settled there in 1809.
Similarly, nearby Harford was once known as "Nine Partners," named after
nine families who arrived from Massachusetts in 1790.


Glenburn
In 1848, George Humphrey bought land near what is now Glenburn Pond, and
for almost 30 years the area was called Humphreysville. During this period,
the poems and novels of Sir Walter Scott enjoyed widespread popularity in
America, especially among the social set.

Scott sometimes used the word 'glen' to describe locales in his works, and
he is credited with popularizing the use of the word in this country. 'Glen'
literally means 'narrow valley' though it evokes images of a pristine
community.

'Burn' is a Scottish form of 'brook,' and the combined word 'Glenburn'
achieves a pronounced literary effect and still describes the area
accurately. Today Glenburn is one of the region's finest places to live.


Gouldsboro
What Michael Jordan is to basketball in the 1990's, Jay Gould of New York
was to gold in the 1860's. A railroad buyer and seller, among other things,
Gould in 1856 built a tannery at what soon came to be called Gouldsborough.
Jay Gould was known to enter business partnerships, siphon off company money
for his personal real estate ventures, run the business into the ground,
and then use company security guards to keep his partners outside the gates.
In the years following the Civil War, when the American currency was weak,
Gould tried to profit from the situation. His subsequent attempt to corner
the gold market led to the infamous "Black Friday" of September 1869. 
The price of gold plunged and the nation was thrown into a financial panic.


Great Bend
Located in Susquehanna County, just south of the New York line, Great
Bend was once known as Lodersville. The Susquehanna River heads toward Great
Bend from Binghamton and then takes a "great bend" and heads back up into
New York State.


Greensburg
Greensburg, southeast of Pittsburgh, was originally known as Newtown,
that is until the postal service requested a name change because a couple
Newtown's already existed in the state. (For instance, the "Newton" part of
the Newton-Ransom area, just west of Scranton, is most likely a shortened form
of "New Town".) So in 1786, community leaders renamed Newtown as Greensburg
in honor of Gen. Nathanael Greene, a Revolutionary War hero. Among those
community leaders was Maj. Gen. Arthur St. Clair, a friend of Green as
well as the first president of the U.S. Continental Congress. And it's a
fair guess the town of St. Clair, near Interstate 81 in N.E. PA, was named
for the major general. General Greene never set foot in Newtown, but he was
remembered by local soldiers who fought under his command at the Battle of
Trenton. And it was Greene's leadership in the Southern campaign against
the British that helped set the stage for the surrender of British Gen.


Hanover Township
This town was settled by German "refugees" from the border town of
Hanover, Pennsylvania, a region where the border with Maryland was still
subject to occasional disputes. The disputes led to jurisdictional confusion,
creating a breeding ground for fugitives from other regions. Rather than live
among so many undesirables, these folks who originally came from Hannover,
Germany headed toward Northeast PA.


Harford
Harford was originally known as "Nine Partners," for the first
nine families who settled in this Susquehanna County town in 1790.
The settlers had traveled from Massachusetts, possibly passing through
Hartford, Connecticut along the way. Perhaps they were impressed by what
they saw, for by 1807 the area was called Hartford.

A close-knit group, they gathered soon thereafter to discuss the
ramifications of the name. In one of history's more profound quotes, up
there with "Don't give up the ship," Hartford resident Laban Capran is
reported to have stood up, run his thumbs up and down his suspenders and
urged his neighbors: "Strike out the T." Any further bursts of eloquence
from old Laban have been lost to the ages.


Harrisburg
Named in 1785 by John Harris Jr. who laid out the town.  Harris' father
ran a ferry service here beginning in the 1750s. Shortly after 1785, state
officials changed Harrisburg's name to Louisburg, in honor of Louis XVI
and out of recognition for France's support of the colonies in the war
with Britain.

But although the name was officially Louisburg, everyone still called
the joint Harrisburg, as the Harrises were popular people indeed. The state
got the message and soon changed the official name back.


Harvey's Lake
This one is sent in by Nanette Armstrong: Consulting the book "Harvey's
Lake" by F. Charles Petrillo, Harvey's Lake was "discovered" by Benjamin
Harvey in 1781. Harvey had been held prisoner by the British-Indian war
party, and when no longer thought a threat to the British war effort was
released. Following Bowman's Creek he then came upon a ridge and saw the
lake through the trees. He followed the lake around to find his home which
was situated on Harvey's Creek at West Nanticoke.


Hawley
Sitting at the northern tip of Lake Wallenpaupack, Hawley has seen several
name changes over the years. The settlement that grew into present-day Hawley
was formed at an eddy (a little whirlpool) near where the Lackawaxen and
Wallenpaupack Rivers converged.

By 1792 the area became known as "The Eddy;" by 1829, Paupack Eddy;
and by 1848, Falls Port.

A year later came the name Hawleysburgh, named for Irad Hawley, first
president of the Pennsylvania Coal Company, which figured prominently in the
development of the Hawley-Honesdale area. By 1851 the "burgh" was dropped,
giving us the name we know today.


Hazleton
This is the case of the famous misspelling. Hazleton was referred
to as Hazel Town in the first half of the last century, because so many
hazel bushes dotted the area. The name later became one word: Hazeltown,
then Hazelton. But in 1856 an attorney drawing up the city's incorporation
papers spelled hazel as hazle, and no one picked up on the error until it
was too late.


Heart Lake
Heart Lake is shaped like, what else, a heart. But shape names aren't
always so accurate. Half Moon Lake, near Moscow, is shaped more like a
crescent, so the name in only half right.


Honesdale
To transport coal to the eastern markets, gravity railroads carried
the loads out of the Lackawanna Valley and over the Moosic Mountains into
Honesdale. At Honesdale, coal was transferred onto the barges of the D&H
canal. The canal construction had been pioneered by Philip Hone, a wealthy
New York mayor and first president of the D&H. The town was known initially,
in 1827, as Hone's Dale.


Honey Pot
Named by a Major Alden (for whom Alden is named) in 1772 as he reportedly
discovered hordes of wild bees there. Another "discovery" town is Sugar
Notch; early Yankee settlers named it after they found an abundance of
sugar maple trees in this mountain notch south of Wilkes-Barre.


Hop Bottom
Named after nearby Hop Bottom Creek, where wild hops grew on the bottom.


Huntingdon
Huntingdon is located on the site of a famous old Indian village called
Standing Stone, so-named because of an obelisk or stone totem pole that stood
at the site for many years, through the mid 1700's. Indian legend said the
local tribe would thrive as long as the stone stood, though they packed up and
left by 1754. A decade later, the land was bought by one Rev. William Smith,
the first administrator of the University of Pennsylvania. It so happened
that one of the first benefactors of the University was the Countess of
Huntingdon, one of the leading philanthropists of her time. In gratitude,
Smith called his new plot of land "Huntingdon," though the locals still
called the place Standing Stone for many years to come.


Hyde Park
Once a borough independent of Scranton, Hyde Park got its name sometime
between 1825 and 1830. One early homeowner in Hyde Park, Harvey Chase, had
recently moved from Hyde Park, New York, home of the future Roosevelt estate.

One day Chase took a piece of wood, painted the name "Hyde Park" on it,
and placed the sign in his neighbor's front yard.  Needless to say, the
name stuck.

Hyde Park, New York had been named for Edward Hyde, governor of the New
York colony from 1702 to 1708. The name's choice, no doubt, was influenced
by the famous Hyde Park in London.


Jermyn
Once known as Gibsonburg, it takes its name from John Jermyn, a wealthy
Englishman with mining interests.


Jersey Shore
From the late 1790s until 1826, Jersey Shore officially was called
Waynesburg, located on the north side of the Susquehanna, west of
Williamsport. During this time, many settlers arrived from eastern New
Jersey, and over the years more and more Jersey folk descended upon the
Waynesburg area.

The locals on the opposite side of the river poked fun at the newcomers
and started calling the Waynesburg shore "the Jersey shore." The new name
started appearing on maps around 1826.


Jessup
Settled in 1849, Jessup has seen several name changes. First called
Saymour, later Mount Vernon, and then Winton, after William Winton who
established a coal breaker there in the mid-1870's. The current name was
taken from the prominent Jessup family of Montrose. Today you can still
find Mount Vernon Road and Winton Street in Jessup and Archbald.


Jim Thorpe
As most everyone knows, Jim Thorpe was once known as Mauch Chunk, an
Indian name for "Bear Mountain." What's not as well known is: - There's
quite a movement underway to revert back to the original name. - The name
"Jim Thorpe" was chosen mainly as a publicity stunt to help generate tourism
for a town that had seen better days. - The Asa Packer mansion, a must-see
in this picturesque town, is so haunted that the dogs won't walk in certain
parts of the house.


Keyser Valley
One of the first white settlers in this region was Timothy Keyes (probably
pronounced "Kize") who in 1771 opened a sawmill along the creek that bore
his name, Keyes Creek.  Various spellings over the years led from Keyes,
to Keyesers, and eventually to Keyser, and the section of land later took on
the name of the creek.

For his tireless efforts, Keyes was killed by Indians.


Keystone State
In a 13-stone arch, the keystone is the top stone - the one that locks
the others into place. In such an arch, six stones lay below each side of
the keystone. In the original 13 colonies, six states were located northeast
of Pennsylvania and six states to the southeast, forming a figurative arch.


Kingston
As with Kingston, Rhode Island, this town was originally known as
Kings Town.


Lackawanna
Means "the stream that forks." The fork in question is the confluence
of the Lackawanna River with the Northern Branch of the Susquehanna.


Lackawaxen
Means "where the river forks."


Laflin
Another town built near a mill, this time a gunpowder mill.  The wealthy
H.D. Laflin built seven powder mills here in 1872 and 1873, competing with
the powerful du Pont family's mill in Dupont.


Lake Winola
A tragic legend.  Winola, whose name means "water lily," was a daughter of
an Indian chieftain. Her involvement with a white captive brought dishonor,
and once while looking at her reflection in the lake, she saw an image of
her father in war paint. Fresh scalps hung from the chieftain's waist,
and Winola recognized the scalp of her lover, "whiter than the water
lilies." Winola threw herself at the reflection, never to surface again.


La Plume
Some town names in the Abingtons indicate a people with a taste for good
literature.

Glenburn is a name suggested by Sir Walter Scott's novels; 'Waverley'
is itself the title of a Scott work.

The name La Plume was taken in 1885 by Mrs. Isaac Tillinghast who used
"La Plume" as the pen name for her various writings. A more correct term
for 'pen name' is the French phrase nom de plume, giving evidence of
Mrs.Tillinghast's verbal playfulness.


Larksville
One hundred fifty years ago, people called this area Blindtown, for
reasons one can only guess.

The story goes that the name slowly changed after the death of old Peggy
Lark, who lived in Blindtown until she died at the ripe old age of 106.


Lehigh River / County
From the Delaware Indian word lechauwekink, meaning "where there are
forks." Indian place names often refer to forks in rivers, and for good
reason. Rivers were the interstate highways of their day, and forks were
the crossroads.

This name however referred to a fork in a path, not in a river. Eventually
the Indian name here was shortened and anglicized by the local setters;
the original name sure is a little rough on the tongue. One of the main
trails of the Delaware Indian crossed the Lehigh River, and at this point
the trail branched off into various forks, giving us the name.


Lehighton
The name means little more than "Lehigh Town."


Light Street
This town near Bloomsburg was named by a minister who once lived on
Light Street in Baltimore.


Lock Haven
In 1833, Jeremiah Church bought some land adjacent to the Pennsylvania
Canal and alongside the Susquehanna River. In a display of self-promotion,
Church reasoned that the canal contained a lock, and the river made an
excellent haven for rafts. Thus was born Lock Haven.


Loyalsock
Located in Lycoming County, the name means "middle creek."


Luzerne County
Luzerne, in effect, means lighthouse. The name honors the Chevalier de la
Luzerne, a French nobleman who raised critical funds for the colonial forces
at a low point in the Revolutionary War.

He later became French minister to the United States.

The family name is traced to Luzern, a village in central Switzerland
on Lake Lucerne. The village and lake take their name from the prominent
lucerna nearby - French for lighthouse or watchtower.


Lycoming
This north-central PA county comes from the Delaware Indian name
"lycaumick", meaning "sandy or gravelly creek."


Macungie
Located near Allentown, this is an Indian name for "the feeding place
of bears."


Mahanoy City
Indians noted the fact that deer congregated at the salt deposits near
what is now Mahanoy City. In English, we call such deposits a "lick." The
Delaware Indian name for lick is mahoni, hence the transition over time
from "Mahoni City" into the present-day form of this Schuylkill County
town. Schuylkill, by the way, is not an Indian name, but is Dutch for
"hidden stream."

When Dutch explorers first passed the mouth of the Schuylkill River,
they missed it completely, so later they gave it this name.


Mansfield
Laid out in 1824 on the field of Asa Mann, resulting in Mann's Field,
a spelling that lasted for several years before changing into the modern
form. On more than one occasion, Asa thanked his lucky star his last name
wasn't "Hole."


Mayfield
Originally known as Greenwood, the area later became Mayville, named for
Captain William May, a manager in the nearby mining operations. The name
changed to the more pleasant sounding Mayfield in 1891, joining Glenburn
and Elmhurst as town names chosen to help convey a more pastoral image.


Mehoopany
Referred to as Hoppeny as far back as 1792, the name means "place of
wild potatoes."


Meshoppen
Indian for "glass beads,' referring perhaps to an early trading point
where glass beads were accepted as the medium of exchange.


Milford
A ford is a shallow part of a body of water that can be crossed by
wading. Prior to the Revolution, the Wells brothers operated a saw mill and a
grist (grain) mill near an old ford on Saw Creek, which feeds the Delaware.
This ford came to be called the mill ford, and the nearby settlement took
on the Mill-ford name.


Milton
Like Milford, Milwaukee, and Miners Mills, Milton takes it name from a
local mill, and was in fact first called Mill Town.


Milwaukee
This village to the west of Scranton was once known as Flickerville, but
the name was changed in 1842 to coincide with the opening of a new mill.
Local inhabitants celebrated the name change with great fanfare, and many
believed the modern-sounding Milwaukee was now headed for the big time.
The precise reason for choosing Milwaukee is unclear.

Perhaps the inclusion of the word "mill" within the name of the respected
Wisconsin city bode well for future success, or perhaps the town fathers
understood Milwaukee as an Algonquin Indian name for "good land."


Minooka
Despite rumors to the contrary, Minooka is not an Indian name for "land
of many Irish bars." Actually Minooka is not an Indian name at all, and its
origin is unclear. Some have linked the word to "good land," claiming 'mino'
means 'good' and 'aki' means 'land,' but this explanation seems contrived.


Mocanaqua
The name origin of this town on the Susquehanna, midway between Nanticoke
and Berwick, is utterly intriguing and bears further development in
time. Many thanks to Paul Croughn of Wilkes-Barre for sending in the links,
by the way. First, let's steal some information from the historical marker
pictured on one of those links: In 1778, young Frances Slocum was kidnapped
by Delaware Indians from her home near Forty Fort. 1778 was also the year of
the infamous Wyoming Massacre, though Slocum's family -- devout Quakers --
felt secure among the Indian presence. Raised with the customs and language
of the Delaware, Slocum was renamed "Mocanaqua" and later married a chief of
the Miami tribe. For 59 years her brothers searched far and wide for Frances,
only to find her in 1837, a woman then so steeped in Indian ways she found
her brothers' demeanor alien to her way of life. For more information on
the life of Frances Slocum, a.k.a. "Mocanaqua", check out these sites:

http://users.anderson.edu/~roebuck/Francis_Slocum.html
http://www.rootsweb.com/~scwhite/slocum/frances.html


Montrose
Named around 1812 by a local landowner, Dr. Robert Rose, Montrose combines
the doctor's name with the French mont, meaning 'mountain.' The area had
previously been known as Hinds' Settlement, after a Captain Hinds who
brought his family here from Long Island ten years earlier.

In choosing Montrose, Dr. Rose no doubt also had in mind the legendary
Scottish town of the same name.

Rose had a reputation for being a charming man. When residents of nearby
Brooklyn mounted a campaign to locate the Susquehanna County seat in their
town, Rose's personality carried the day, and the town of Montrose eventually
claimed the prize.


Moosic
Very simply, "Mooseland." Means "great herds of moose." Indeed, moose
could at one time be found in Moosic.


Moscow
Once part of Drinker's Beeches, Moscow was named in the 1830s by Drinker
for its many immigrants from Moscow, Russia. Well, that's the myth. The only
problem is, where's the evidence? Where are Russian family names, Russian
churches, Russian street names, etc.? Regardless, several other towns in
the state share their names with European cities, among them Versailles,
Berlin, Manchester, Dublin, Belfast, Hamburg, Athens, and Rome.


Mt. Carmel
One of several towns whose name comes directly from the Bible.


Mount Cobb
Asa Cobb came to this area around 1784 and worked the land near what is
now Mt. Cobb. The gap in the mountain - for a time called Cobb's Mountain -
leading east out of Dunmore was long known as Cobb's Gap, and Moosic Lake
was for years called Cobb's Mountain Pond. And it's a good thing the Archbald
Pothole didn't form here, or else we'd be calling it the Asa Hole.


Nanticoke
Apparently Nanticoke was an early home of Nanticoke Indians (or Native
Americans, to the politically correct, which I am not). The story goes that
Nanticoke owed its beginnings to water power made possible by a nearby
falls. The Nanticoke, by the way, known for settling the eastern shore
region of Maryland, are sometimes known as "the seashore settlers." At
least one other town in this region, Towanda, owes its name to the Nanticoke.


Nay Aug
From 'naw-yaug,' meaning "roaring brook." So, obviously it's not just
a coincidence that Roaring Brook passes through Nay Aug Park.


Nescopeck
An Indian word meaning "black, deep, and still water."


New Milford
Known as McCarty's Corners in the 1790's, this town 30 miles north
of Scranton was first inhabited by settlers from the area of Milford,
Connecticut and bears no special relation to Milford on the Delaware River.


Newport Township
Named by settlers from Newport, Rhode Island.


Newton
Newton, to the west of Scranton, was named by settlers from Newton in
northwestern New Jersey. The name Newton is merely a shortened form of
"New Town," a common designation in the early years of this country. Other
New Jersey towns that share Pennsylvania names are Lewistown, Quakertown,
Milford, Allentown, Lebanon and Hamburg. And don't forget, Pennsylvania
has a Jersey Shore.


New Tripoli
This place near Allentown took its name in 1816 to commemorate the success
of the American navy in its skirmishes with the famed pirates of Tripoli
on the north African coast. And for some reason, the residents pronounce
the name as New Trip-OLE'-ee (rhymes with canoli).


Nicholson
Named for John Nicholson, Pennsylvania comptroller from 1782 to 1794.
A land speculator, Nicholson claimed ownership to more than 3.7 million
acres covering parts of 39 counties. Due to "unsettled accounts," Nicholson's
land reverted to the state. In 1800, Nicholson died in prison.


Old Forge
The mediocre quality of ore in the Old Forge area led to at least one
abandoned forge around 1800. A quarter century later, when settlers returned,
the community referred to the abandoned works as the "old forge."


Olyphant
Named for George Talbot Olyphant, a D&H president.


Orangeville & Orange Township
Named by newcomers from Orange County, New York.


Palmyra
Located near Hawley, Palmyra basically means "Palm City," though it's
unlikely that former Surgeon General Jocelyne Elders has ever visited. Palmyra
was once the name of an ancient caravan city (now called Tudmur) in central
Syria.

A desert oasis, Palmyra dates past Biblical times.

In the Book of Genesis, Chapter 12, Abraham gathers his family and
possessions and begins the journey to the land of Canaan, a trip that took
him through four regions whose town names appear in Wayne County: Palmyra,
Damascus, Galilee, and finally Canaan. (If he lived in Wayne County today,
he could stop off in Abrahamsville.)

Biblical town names are not uncommon to eastern Pennsylvania. They
include Nazareth, Ararat, Bethlehem and Mt. Carmel.


Parsons section
Once known as Laurel Run, Parsons became a station on the Lehigh &
Susquehanna line in the mid-1800s.

Since the line already had a Laurel Run station elsewhere, a name change
was in order and the honor fell upon Calvin Parson, a prominent resident.


Peckville
Williamsport was once a lumber capital of the world, but Northeastern
Pennsylvania also saw its share of the lumber industry. For many years,
the Peck Lumber Manufacturing Company contributed heavily to the region's
economy. Begun by Samuel Peck of Massachusetts, and passed down through Peck's
descendents, the Peck company was located in what came to be called Peckville.


Pennsylvania
Was almost named New Wales, then almost Sylvania, until King Charles II
added the "Penn."


Pike County
Named for General Zebulon Montgomery Pike, killed in 1813 at the Battle
of York (now Toronto). This is the same Pike who, seven years earlier while
exploring the Louisiana Territory, discovered Pikes' Peak.

As a youth, Pike often traveled through the Pike County region.


Pittston
Pittston was once known as Pittstown, in honor of Sir William Pitt, the
same Pitt as in Pittsburgh. Prior to the American Revolution, settlements
along the Susquehanna were considered part of the western frontier and were
often the victims of scattered Indian attacks. Frequently these attacks were
encouraged by Spanish and French agents eager to intimidate English-born
settlers.

Pitt was the first to convince England to commit enough resources to
repel the Spanish and French, and his efforts led to enormous popularity
in the colonies.

An important river ferry point during the Revolution, Pittstown
later became Pittston Ferry, until eventually the ferry and the name were
dropped. Many ferries plowed the Susquehanna and Delaware in Pennsylvania's
early days, leaving us names like Dingmans' Ferry on the Delaware, Fisher's
Ferry near Selinsgrove, and McCall's Ferry south of Lancaster. And Harrisburg,
remember, was once called Harris' Ferry.


Plymouth
Named by settlers from either Plymouth, Massachusetts or Connecticut,
which were named by settlers from Plymouth, England, the home port of the
Mayflower.

The local Plymouth was first known as Shawneetown, since the village
sat near the site of an old Shawnee community.

In fact, Shawnee Avenue exists today in Plymouth, PA.


Pocono
From the Indian (probably Delaware Indian) word pocohanne: "stream
between two mountains," referring to the Delaware Water Gap.


Port Matilda
No port to be found in this S.W. PA town, except for the port wine that
some girl named Matilda reportedly fetched for her father back in the old,
old days.


Providence
The original township in the Scranton area, Providence remained an
independent community until its merger with Scranton in 1866. The township
was founded around 1770 by settlers from Providence, Rhode Island and
quickly became known as a place to fetch a good bottle of whiskey.

In its early years, people referred to the area as Centerville as well
as "The Corners," a name which remains today in the form of "Providence
Corners." By 1827, folks outside of Providence often called the town
"Razorville," poking fun at the supposed shady horse-trading practices of
these ex-Yankees from New England.

In naming the township, the founders (perhaps with Indians on their
minds) no doubt sought to elicit all the divine providence they could get
their hands on, not to mention the whiskey.


Punxsutawney
Here's an interesting one. Apparently the early settlers were overwhelmed
at times by the huge numbers of nearly-invisible gnats that infested the
region. The nickname for these gnats was "punkies", a name you'll still
find in a good dictionary. So Punxsutawney is merely the "town of punkies."


Ransom
Named for Captain Samuel Ransom who raised a company to defend the
Wyoming Valley from the British. Ransom was killed in the Wyoming Massacre
of July 1778.


Rough & Ready
Near Shamokin, this name was borrowed from a California town named during
the 1849 gold rush.


Scranton
A string of names preceded Scranton. The first name may have been Capouse
(after Capoose - father of Winola - chief of the Munsee tribe, from which
Muncy takes its name. Also, note that Capouse Avenue is one block away from
Monsey Avenue in the Green Ridge section). Other names included Slocum Hollow
(which the Slocum family didn't like one bit), Deep Hollow, Unionville,
Harrison, Lackawanna Iron Works, Scrantonia, and almost - but not quite -
Armstrong.

Slocum and Harrison Avenues still exist, but fortunately the other names
are gone.

The city was eventually named for George and Selden Scranton who came from
New Jersey in 1840, bought most of what is now downtown Scranton for $8,000
and began to smelt iron. The first Scranton in America was John Scranton,
a Puritan who landed in Boston in 1637 and originally came from the area
of Guilford, England.


Sebastopol
Sebastopol began as a port village along the Susquehanna, south
of Pittston. Once called Thompson (Thompson Street still exists), the
name eventually was changed to Sevastopol to commemorate the courage of
the legendary Russian port city on the Crimean Peninsula (Crimea is now
Ukrainian territory).

Located on the northern shores of the Black Sea, Sevastopol resisted
a 349-day siege during the Crimean War in 1854. Leveled in the battle,
Sevastopol soon rebuilt itself, working its way into the imagination of an
America in the throes of the Civil War.


Shamokin
This name has been variously translated as "eel stream," "where the
chief lived," and "where horns are plentiful," and I will resist the urge
to throw in a cheezy one-liner at this point.


Shickshinny
Situated along a scenic strip of Route 11, midway between Nanticoke and
Berwick, Shickshinny is named for nearby Shickshinny Creek. The word means
"five mountains," as five mountains do indeed converge near Shickshinny:
Newport, Knob, Lee's, River, and Rocky Mountains.


Snowshoe
Not really in Northeastern Pennsylvania, Snowshoe sits not far from the
geographic center of the state.

In 1773, local surveyors found a snow shoe hanging in a tree here,
not far from the site of an abandoned Indian camp.


Stroudsburg
In the summer of 1778, Stroudsburg became a haven for survivors of the
Wyoming Massacre.

Two years earlier, Colonel Jacob Stroud had bought some land tracts
and built a stockade here.

The stockade, known as Fort Penn, provided protection for the former
Wyoming settlers, a gesture that enhanced the fatherly status of Colonel
Stroud.


Sugarloaf
A sugarloaf is simply a pile of refined sugar in the shape of a cone.
The word was much more common a century ago than it is today.

Sugarloaf Mountain is the cone-shaped hill that seems to rise out of
nowhere, reaching a height of 500 feet right in the middle of the Sugarloaf
Valley, site of the town of Sugarloaf.

Lying just west of Interstate 81, north of Hazleton, the Sugarloaf Valley
ranks among Pennsylvania's most scenic.


Sugar Notch
Named by settlers from New York and New England who found sugar maple
trees in the notch - or gap - of the mountain there.


Sunbury
Sunbury earned a line in the nation's history in 1883 when Thomas Edison
began operating the world's first three-wire central electric lighting
station here.

Edison was drawn to Sunbury because of its cheap, abundant energy
resources, but local residents apparently weren't drawn to Edison.
Many local folks were simply afraid to walk near the electric wires.

Sitting at the point where the west and north branches of the Susquehanna
converge, Sunbury dates back to 1772 and shares its name with the city on
the Thames, southwest of London.  The word means "city of the sun."


Susquehanna
From sisquehanne:  sisku meaning mud and hanne meaning river, thus
"muddy river." Settlers may have first heard natives speak the name during
a heavy runoff.


Swoyersville
Named for John Henry Swoyer, who operated two coal breakers there. Over
the years, many towns across the country have debated whether it makes more
sense to add an 's' to the founders last name. For nstance, a town named for
John Smith can be called Smithtown or Smithstown, the latter being a condensed
form of "Smith's Town," which is what locals could have first called it. Well,
in the 1950s, voters in Swoyersville put the issue on the ballot, and the 's'
remained, though some people there insist upon calling the place Swoyerville.


Tamaqua
An Indian name for "beaver."

Tamaqua Creek is sometimes called "Beaver Creek."


Taylor
Named for Moses Taylor, the famous check writer from New York. Among his
many endeavors, Moses Taylor was a major Union financier during the Civil War.


Throop
Named in the last century for Dr. Benjamin Henry Throop, the Lackawanna
Valley's first physician.


Tobyhanna
Tobyhanna is named for its proximity to Tobyhanna Creek, whose banks
are covered by alder trees.

Tobi is an Indian word for alder, and hanna means river or stream.


Towanda
From a Nanticoke Indian name tawundeunk, meaning "where we bury the
dead." Nanticoke rituals included burying the bones of the dead in sacred
grounds.

Towanda, once called Meansville, takes the name from the nearby Towanda
Creek.


Transfer
Located in western PA, about midway between Erie and Pittsburgh. In the
early years of the railroad, there were two gauges of rail used for the
trains: narrow and regular. "Transfer" was where the narrow gauge rails
stopped and the loads were transferred to the standard gauge for the
remainder of the journey.


Tripp's Park
Nowadays relegated to nickname status in West Scranton, Tripp's Park is
named to honor one of Scranton's first settlers: Isaac Tripp, who arrived
here in 1788, probably not far from the current-day Tripp Street.


Tunkhannock
Some tribes used a word to denote the smaller of two converging streams,
and the word is tankhanne.

The tankhanne in question is the adjacent Tunkhannock Creek, which
converges with the Susquehanna River.


Versailes
If you live in this western-PA town, you don't pronounce it "Ver-SIGH". No
sir. You call it "Ver-SALES".


Wallenpaupack
"Deep, stagnant water."

The water referred to is not Lake Wallenpaupack itself (created long
after the native Indians left) but a nearby stream.


Wapwallopen
Means "where the wild hemp grows."


Waverly
The novels of Sir Walter Scott achieved a high degree of popular success in
the last century.

One of his earliest successes was "Waverley," written in 1805 and part
of the popular Waverley Novels.

Several American towns chose Waverley - or Waverly - as their name in
the years following publication.

Local credit for the name goes to Louise Palmer Smith of Glenburn,
who nominated the name in 1853.


Wayne County
Named for General "Mad Anthony" Wayne who was very successful at putting
down Indian skirmishes in Pennsylvania.


Weatherly
Named around 1840 for David Weatherly, a clock maker. The great part of
the story is that Weatherly promised a beautiful clock for the town if they'd
name the joint after him. The only problem is that Weatherly got the honor,
but he never delivered the clock.


West Middlesex
A reader from this town asked about its name origin, and no information
turned up. However, the Essex, Middlesex, and Sussex regions of England
take their names directly from the Saxons, who along with the Angles of
course gave England its Anglo-Saxon heritage. And even today, there's a
region in Germany known as Saxony. 'Essex' is a shortened form of 'East Saxon
Region,' and Sussex comes from "South-Saxon Region," so it doesn't take much
imagination to figure out how West Middlesex got its name back in England.


West Pittston
Until 1859, West Pittston was known as Jenkins Fort, a small stockade
built by the British in 1778. Jenkins Fort isn't totally forgotten; today
Jenkins Township carries on the name.


White Haven
Named for a Philadelphian, Josiah White, a major stockholder in the
Lehigh Coal & Navigation Company.


Wilkes-Barre
Named to honor John Wilkes and Isaac Barre, members of Parliament during
the Revolutionary period.

Both men argued in the House of Commons, often under considerable
opposition, for greater tolerance of the American cause.


Williamsport
Founded in 1795, Williamsport began as a strategic landing point on the
Susquehanna, sitting between the mouths of the Loyalsock and Lycoming Creeks.
An excellent river harbor, the city was known as "William's Port," though
doubts still exist over the exact William in question.

In the 1860s, Williamsport was the center of the U.S. lumber industry
- close to dense timberlands but within quick river access to the
Atlantic. The industry produced vast wealth for a concentrated few, and
even today Williamsport high school teams are called "The Millionaires."
By the end of the century, however, this pre-eminence disappeared as the
local industry faced strikes and deforestation.


Wyalusing
Moravian missionaries shortened the difficult-to-pronounce "machiwilusing"
around 1792. The name means "home of the ancient warrior."

Missionaries sometimes referred to the town as Friedensuetten, meaning
"Tents of Peace."


Wyoming (town) and Wyoming Valley
The Delaware Indians called the valley M'chwewormink: "extensive plains
or meadows."  New Englanders had trouble pronouncing the difficult first
syllable, so they shortened the word and for a time the valley was called
"Wayomik" and "Waioming."

