
Pennsylvania
From http://www.negenealogy.com ...

BEGIN

The Dutch first came to the area now known as Pennsylvania following Henry
Hudson's exploration of the Delaware River, the state's waterway to the
Atlantic, but they did little more than establish trading posts. Swedes
arrived in 1638 and, with the Finns who came about the same time, spilled
over into what is now the Philadelphia area. The Dutch gained control of
New Sweden in 1655, but nine years later England conquered New Netherland,
and Pennsylvania became a part of the Duke of York's new territory, which
included New York, New Jersey, and Delaware. In 1673-74 the Dutch regained
control, but soon the colony was back under English rule.

None of these early settlements had the lasting impression on Pennsylvania
as did William Penn's colony. Chartered in 1681 by King Charles II to Penn,
a Quaker, Pennsylvania received her new governor aboard the Welcome the
following year. The new immigrants were primarily English Quakers, although
some were of Welsh, Scottish, and Irish ancestry.  Pennsylvania became a
royal province briefly in 1692-94 when Penn lost his power over the conflict
between the proprietary and popular elements, but the colony then resumed
under the proprietary government until the American Revolution, and Penn
and his descendants left a long-standing influence, especially in terms of
governing, in dealing with the native population, and in providing a haven
of religious tolerance.

Penn's "Holy Experiment" encouraged throngs of immigrants in the next
century. The two largest groups were the Ulster-Scots, who first came
in 1707 and in greater numbers from 1728 on, and the Germans, who first
arrived in 1683. The Germans, mostly from the Rhine, included subgroups
that characterize those who have become known, more culturally than
ethnically, as the "Pennsylvania Dutch"--Amish, Dunkers, Mennonites,
Moravians, and Schwenkfelders, although the majority of Pennsylvania
Germans were Lutheran, Reformed, Roman Catholic. They first settled
beyond the Quakers of the Philadelphia area--in Lancaster, Northampton,
Berks, and Lehigh counties--eventually moving west along a more central
route. The Ulster-Scots tended to settle a bit beyond the Germans, first
in the Cumberland Valley, and then they continued west, but southerly,
and populated southwestern Pennsylvania. The westward movements were made
despite the Allepheny mountains that diagonally divide the rectangular-shaped
state, and early settlements tended to be made in the valleys, such as the
Cumberland, Lebanon, and Lehigh. Other immigrants in the 1700s included Welsh
(some of whom were Quakers), French (including Huguenots, later Acadians,
and at the end of the century refugees from revolutionary-torn France and
Haiti), Irish, Jews, and blacks. In spite of the strong Quaker influence,
slavery did exist in Pennsylvania, but of the 10,000 blacks there in 1790,
over half were free, and slavery was phased out by the early 1800s.

Most of Pennsylvania's western settlers had migrated from the eastern
part of the province. Some came up from Maryland and Virginia, such as
Ulster-Scots and Germans, many of whom had ventured south from Pennsylvania
earlier. The Holland Land Company's territory extended into the Northwestern
part of Pennsylvania, where New Yorkers met Pennsylvanians coming north
from Washington, Allegheny, and other southwestern counties.

It has generally been believed that the Penns dealt fairly with the Native
Americans, peacefully acquiring additional territory through treaties and
purchase; however, some historians question this. As settlers pushed westward,
however, they forced the natives ahead of them, and the resulting hostilities
peaked during the French and Indian War. This conflict caused Pennsylvania
to create its first militia in order to defend the frontier settlements.

Pennsylvania claimed northeastern Pennsylvania and began sending settlers
there in the 1750s. A bitter conflict ensued until Pennsylvania relinquished
its claim through the Decree of Trenton in 1782. Other boundary disputes
took place with New York and, in the southwest, with Virginia. The most
famous, however, was the controversy between the Penns and Lord Baltimore. A
temporary line was drawn with Maryland in 1739, but the fixed boundary was
not settled until Charles Mason and Jeremiah Dixon's work was ratified in
1769, creating what became the historic slave/free state division between
the North and South.

At the time of the Revolutionary War, Pennsylvania was the "Keystone"
between the northern and southern colonies, and many important events
took place in Philadelphia that shaped the emerging nation; the state's
charter referred to the "Commonwealth" of Pennsylvania, to help express
democracy. The British invaded Philadelphia and defeated the patriots
at Germantown in 1776, but Pennsylvania is probably best remembered for
the harsh winter of 1777-78 that Washington's poorly trained army spent
at Valley Forge. During the War of 1812 Pennsylvanians were instrumental
in Commodore Perry's victory on Lake Erie. (The "Erie Triangle," now Erie
County, was purchased from Native Americans in 1792, to provide the state
with a port on the lake. Pennsylvania's third port is Pittsburgh, whose
early development was the result of its location on the Ohio River.) The
Commonwealth was greatly involved in the Civil War, including the Battle
of Gettysburg, a major turning point for the Union army.

END



From the Internet ...

    Pennsylvania

The idea of founding a separate colony in America as a refuge for persecuted
Quakers was not original with William Penn, but with George Fox, the founder
of the sect. Fox was a man of intense religious fervor and of wonderful
personal magnetism. Greatly trouble in conscience, he sought rest for his
unquiet soul in the Established Church, then among the Dissenters, and
finally, after a most diligent study of the Bible, he felt that the "inner
light" had dawned upon him, and he went forth to preach to the world. He
began preaching at the age of twenty years, in 1644, the year in which
William Penn was born. His sincerity was unquestioned and his fervor was
contagious; he became the found of a sect, the prime actor of one of the
greatest religious movements of the seventeenth century. The times seemed
ripe for such an awakening, and within forty years from the time that Fox
began preaching his followers numbered seventy thousand.

The Quakers refused to recognize all social ranks, or to pay taxes to carry on
wars, and they met with great opposition from the beginning; their meetings
were often dispersed by armed men; an act of Parliament pronounced them a
"mischievous and dangerous people." It was not long until the Quakers,
driven by persecution, began to migrate to America.  Their reception in
Massachusetts and elsewhere was anything but cordial, and this led them
to turn their attention to founding a colony of their own. Most of the
followers of Fox were from the lower walks of life, and they were greatly
elated when the talented young son of Admiral Penn, a personal friend of the
king, became an open convert to their society.  The admiral at first stormed
at his son for taking this step. The king was about to raise the elder Penn
to the peerage, but when he heard that the son had become a Quaker, he drew
back. This increased the fury of the father against his son. But his anger
was short-lived; he at length forgave him, and William Penn soon became the
most prominent Quaker in England. His experience in New Jersey we have noted;
but owing to the various contentions of that colony with New York and to the
want of clear land titles, home seekers were rather repelled than invited,
and Penn cast a wistful eye to the fair lands beyond the Delaware.

The king of England was indebted to Admiral Penn to the sum of [pounds]16,000,
and William Penn, on the death of his father, inherited the claim. At Penn's
request King Charles granted him, in payment of this claim, a tract of
forty thousand square miles in America. In the petition to the king, dated
June, 1680, Penn asked for the territory west of the Delaware River and
from the northern boundary of Maryland to the north "as far as plantable,
which is altogether Indian." It was the largest grant ever made to one man
in America. The charter was granted the following March. Penn had chosen
the name New Wales for his province, but the king called it Pennsylvania
in memory of the deceased admiral.^1

The dispute between Lord Baltimore and Penn began the same year in which
the charter was granted, the former claiming that the fortieth degree fell
north of Philadelphia, whereas the king in granting the charter had supposed
it would fall at the head of Delaware Bay. Penn therefore insisted that the
line be fixed where it was supposed to be, and, after a long contention,
the matter was settled in his favor. The boundary line, however, was not
determined until many years later -- long after Penn and Baltimore were in
their graves. It was not until 1767 that two English surveyors, Mason and
Dixon, completed this line, which has since borne their names, and which,
after acquiring a new meaning, became the most famous boundary line in the
New World.^2

Of all the colony builders of America the most famous in our history is
Penn. Nor was he excelled by any in sincerity of purpose and loftiness of
aim. His province was a princely domain, a vast fertile region traversed by
beautiful rivers and lofty mountain ranges, and holding beneath the soil a
wealth of minerals unequaled for it was one vast forest, extending from the
Delaware over the Appalachia Mountain system, down its western slope and
far into the Ohio Valley. It was inhabited by Indians alone, except for a
few Swedish hamlets along the lower Delaware, the inhabitants of which, some
five hundred in number, Penn pronounced a "strong, industrious people." Penn
was granted ample power for the government of his new possessions, the king
requiring, as a token of allegiance, two beaver skins each year, and also a
fifth of the gold and silver that might be mined. In this feature the charter
reminds us of the charter of Maryland. The proprietor was clothed with the
power to establish courts, appoint judges, to train soldiers, to wage wars,
and to make laws; but the king retained the veto power, and, unlike all the
other colonial charters, the power of taxing the people of the colony was
reserved to the English Parliament. This provision remained a dead letter
until the approach of the Revolution, when it became very significant.^3 A
strange omission of this charter was that it did not guarantee the settlers
the rights of Englishmen, as did the other charters. To gain an outlet to
the sea Penn purchased of the Duke of York the three counties of Delaware,
as we have seen.

That Penn was a religious enthusiast and a true philanthropist is well known;
that he was a man of the world whose secondary object, private gain, was
never lost sight of, is not so well known, but equally true.^4 His venture
in colony planting was soon published widely over England.  He drew up a
frame of government and offered a liberal share of the government to the
colonists. He also offered five thousand acres for one hundred pounds and
one hundred acres for two pounds, subject to a small quitrent, and it was
not long till many were ready to join the enterprise. Penn appointed his
relative, William Markham, the first governor of Pennsylvania, and in the
autumn of 1681 sent him ahead with three shiploads of emigrants. Markham
bore an affectionate letter from the proprietor to the Swedes in which he
said, "You shall be governed by laws of your own making, and live a free,
and if you will, a sober, industrious people."

The year after Markham's voyage Penn himself followed him to the New World
in the ship /Welcome/. The passengers numbered about a hundred, one third
of whom died of smallpox on the ocean. The /Welcome/ sailed up the Delaware
and landed at New Castle in the autumn of 1682. Penn was received with a
cordial greeting by the inhabitants; he produced his royal patent, which
transferred the territory from the duke to himself, and spoke so kindly to
the people that he readily won their hearts.  Reaching Chester, he called
a provisional legislature, and some time was spent in allotting lands and
framing laws. Proceeding up the Delaware, he came to the site on which was
to rise the city of Philadelphia, soon to become the chief city in colonial
America, and in a later generation the birthplace of independence and of
the Constitution of the United States Here already stood a Swedish village,
and a Lutheran church at Wicaco,^5 and here Penn decided to build a city
and make it the capital of his province. He purchased from the Swedes the
neck of land between the Delaware and the Schuylkill rivers, and in the
early months of 1683 the streets of the new city were laid out. The growth
of Philadelphia was phenomenal. In less than four years it had passed New
York, which had been founded sixty years before.

It was a few months after this time that Penn made his famous treaty with
the Indians under a great elm tree on the banks of the Delaware, a short
distance north of the newly founded city.^6 The Indians were of the Delaware
or Lenni-Lenape tribe. The chiefs sat in a semicircle on the ground, says
tradition,^7 while Penn, with a few unarmed attendants, all in their Quaker
garb, addressed them as friends and brothers, compared the white and red
men to the different members of the human body, and made a pledge to live
in peace and friendship with them. These children of the forest were deeply
touched by the sincerity and open candor of the great Englishman, and they
answered through a chief that they would "live in love with William Penn
and his children as long as the sun and moon gave light."

These mutual vows constituted the treat; no written words were required and
no oath was taken. Yet this sacred treaty was kept unbroken till long after
those who had made it had passed away. It was said that the Quaker dress
was a better protection among the Indians than a musket, and that when an
Indian wished to pay the highest compliment to a white man, he would say,
"He is like William Penn."^8

In the early spring of 1683 the legislature of the colony met in
Philadelphia. The proprietor presented a new frame of government, giving
all power of lawmaking into the hands of the people represented by a council
which should originate all laws and an assembly that should approve them. All
freemen were made citizens and all Christians were freemen, except servants
and convicts. A law passed united the "Lower counties" to Pennsylvania and
naturalizing the Swedes. Penn was voted the veto power for life. Laws were
made for the training of children, the useful employment of criminals,
religious toleration -- and all were in keeping with the human spirit of
the proprietor. For some years the government was very unsettled.

Penn had established a home in Philadelphia, and there would he gladly have
spent his life; but his trouble with Baltimore took home back to England in
the summer of 1684, and his business kept him there for fifteen years. After
the English Revolution Penn was suspected of giving aid and comfort to the
dethroned monarch whose brother had granted him his charter, and in 1692
he was deprived of his colony. The control of Pennsylvania was then placed
into the hands of Governor Fletcher of New York. But nearly two years later,
the charges against Penn having been removed, his right to Pennsylvania
was restored. In 1696 Markham granted a new frame of government, in which
the power to originate legislation was taken from the council and given to
the assembly. Again, in 1699, William Penn crossed the Atlantic to visit his
growing family in the forest of Pennsylvania, and he found that vast changes
had been wrought in his absence. Twenty thousand people had made their homes
in his province. The city that he had founded was fast rising to importance,
and the wilderness of the river valley was dotted with farms. Here he found
not only his fellow Quakers, but Germans from the Rhine, Swedes, and Dutch,
together laying the foundations of a great commonwealth.

The great-souled proprietor had been deeply humbled since last he saw the
fair lands of Pennsylvania, -- he had lost his faithful wife and eldest son,
he had lost his fortune, and he had borne the charge of treason against his
native country. And now to these was added another sorrow -- the people of
his province had been weaned away from him during the intervening years;
he was no longer the "Father Penn" that he had been before; they clamored
for even greater freedom than his generous soul had granted them at first,
and to this was added the demand of Delaware for a separate government.^9
Penn was grieved, but he granted these requests. He gave Delaware a separate
legislature, and a new government to Pennsylvania. The form of government that
Penn now conferred on his colonists practically transferred all power to the
people, subject to their allegiance to the Crown, and the veto power of the
governor. It eliminated the council as a legislative body, giving it but a
negative influence as an advisory board to the governor. It also defined the
rights of prisoners, granted liberty of conscience, and made provision for
amendments. This constitution remained in force for seventy-five years --
to the War for Independence.

In 1701 Penn bade a final adieu to his beloved Pennsylvania and sailed
again for his native land. But even now, after his long years of turmoil,
it was not for him to spend his old age in rest and quiet. On reaching
England, he found that he had been robbed of the remnant of his fortune
by an unjust steward, and later he was thrown into prison for debt. In his
earlier manhood he had suffered various imprisonments for conscience' sake,
but now he chafed under confinement and to secure his release mortgaged his
province in the New World. But still other misfortunes awaited him. He was
stricken with paralysis, and for years he lay a helpless invalid, dying in
1718 at the age of seventy-four.

The character of Penn is one of the most admirable in history. It is
difficult to find a man, especially one whose life is spent in the midst
of political turmoil and governmental strife, so utterly incorruptible
as was William Penn. When on the threshold of manhood, when the hot flush
of youth was on his cheek, the blandishments of wealth and station and of
royal favor beckoned him to a life of ease and pleasure; but he turned away
from them all and chose to cast his lot with a despised people -- purely
for conscience' sake. No allurements of Pharaoh's court, no threats of an
angry father, nor frowning walls of a prison-cell could shake his high-born
purpose to serve God in the way that seemed to him right. His life was full
of light and shadow. He suffered much, but he also accomplished much -- far
more than the age in which he lived was ready to acknowledge. He founded
a government and based it on the eternal principle of equal human rights,
with its sole object as the freedom and happiness of its people; and that
alone was sufficient to give him a name in history.

Thirty-seven years elapsed between the founding of Pennsylvania and the
death of the founder, and he spent but four of these years in America;
yet we are wont to regard William Penn almost as truly an American as was
Franklin or Washington, and in the annals of our country his name must ever
hold a place among the immortals.

The growth of Pennsylvania was more rapid than that of any other of the
thirteen colonies, and though it was the last founded save one, it soon came
to rank with the most important, and at the coming of the Revolution it stood
third in population. Penn had willed the colony to his three son, John,
Thomas, and Richard, and these with their successors held it until after
the Revolution. In the early part of the eighteenth century a great number
of palatine Germans, driven from their homes by religious wars, found their
way to Pennsylvania, settled Germantown (since absorbed by Philadelphia),
and scattered over the Schuylkill and Lehigh valleys. The English were
for a time alarmed at the influx of such numbers of a foreign people; but
they were not long in discovering that these Germans were an industrious,
peace-loving people, fairly educated, and, while wholly unostentatious,
as sincerely religious as the Puritan or the Quaker.

Still greater during this period was the stream of Scotch-Irish from
Ulster. These hardy Scotch Presbyterians, who had occupied northern Ireland
for two or three generations, being curbed in their industries for the
protection of English industries and annoyed by petty religious persecution,
came to America in great numbers,^10 -- so great as to form more than half
the population of Pennsylvania, and to spare many thousands of their numbers
to the southern colonies along the coast and the wilderness of Kentucky and
Tennessee. In Pennsylvania they settled chiefly on the plains and mountain
slopes west and south of the Susquehanna. These people, as well as the
Germans and others, were attracted to Pennsylvania because of the liberal,
humane government inaugurated by William Penn. Slavery was never popular
in Pennsylvania, and the number of slaves was kept down by strict laws
against their importation. Before the Revolution many of them had been set
free by their masters. Of Redemptioners, mostly Germans and Irish, there
were probably more in Pennsylvania during the eighteenth century than in
any other colony. The majority of them, after their period of servitude,
became useful citizens.

During the long period of her colonial youth we find in Pennsylvania the
same kind of quarreling between the people and the governors, the same
vagaries in issuing paper money, the same unbridled spirit of freedom,
the same monotonous history, as we find in most of the other colonies.
Among her governors we find in the early period no really great men, but in
1723 there arrived in Philadelphia a young man from Boston who soon rose
to be the leading figure in the colony, and so he continued for more than
half a century. This was Benjamin Franklin, who, it may be further said,
was the greatest character of colonial America.

*Footnotes*

^1 Penn came near being the author of the name of his colony. When "New
Wales" was abandoned he suggested "Sylvania" (from the Latin word "sylva,"
a forest) and the king added the prefix, "Penn.."

^2 The province was to extend five degrees westward from the Delaware River;
and "the said lands to be bounded on the north by the beginning of the three
and fortieth degree of Northern Latitude, and on the South by a Circle
drawn at twelve miles distance from New Castle Northward and Westward
unto the beginning of the fortieth degree of Northern latitude." (See
Poore's "Charters," Vol. II, p. 1510.) Just what the "beginning of the
three and fortieth" and the "beginning of the fortieth" degrees meant was
not clear. Penn, finding that the fortieth degree fell too far north to
give him a harbor on the Chesapeake, contended that the "beginning" of the
fortieth degree did not mean the fortieth degree, and he won in part; but it
cost him dearly, for, although the charter set the northern boundary at the
"beginning of the forty-third degree," which would have thrown it north of
Buffalo, was finally fixed at the forty-second degree. In 1732 the heirs of
Penn and Baltimore signed an agreement that the line between Pennsylvania and
Maryland be run due west from the tangent of the western boundary of Delaware
with the arc twelve miles from New Castle. Many years of further wrangling
followed, when it was decided to employ the two expert surveyors, Charles
Mason and Jeremiah Dixon, who fixed the line at 39° 44´ and extended it
westward about 230 miles. At intervals of a mile small cut stones were set
in the ground; each stone had a large "P" carved on the north side, and a
"B" on the south side. Every five miles was placed a larger stone bearing
the Pennsylvania coat of arms on one side and that of Lord Baltimore on
the other. These stones were cut in England and afterward brought to the
colonies. A few of them still stand, but time has crumbled many of them;
others have been carried away piecemeal by relic hunters, and a few are
doing service as steps before the doors of farmhouses along the route.

When Mason and Dixon's line was run both Pennsylvania and Maryland were
slave colonies. In later years Pennsylvania emancipated her slaves, while
Maryland retained hers and went with the South. During the half-century
preceding the Civil War, the original limits and meaning of the line were
lost sigh of; no one thought of it as a boundary between two states, but
rather as the boundary between the free and slave states.

^3 See Poore's, "Charters," p. 1515.

^4 See Shepherd's "Proprietary Government in Pennsylvania," p. 174.

^5 This church still stands near the bank of the Delaware, and is one of
the most interesting landmarks in Philadelphia.

^6 The city has long since absorbed the place. The elm was blown down in
1810, and a beautiful monument now marks the spot.

^7 This tradition is doubtless based on Benjamin West's painting. See Fisher's
"True William Penn," pp. 242-245.

^8 Governor Markham had already treated with the Indians for the purchase
of lands, and Penn, on various occasions after this meeting at Shackamaxon,
made bargains with them for lands, the most famous of which was the "Walking
Purchase." By this he was to receive a tract of land extending as far from
the Delaware as a man could walk in three days.  Penn and a few friends,
with a body of Indians, walked about thirty miles in a day and a half and
as he needed no more land at the time, the matter was left to be finished
at some future time. (See Channing's "Students' History," p. 117.) In 1733,
long after Penn's death, the other day and a half was walked out in a very
different spirit. The whites employed the three fastest walkers that could be
found, offering each five hundred acres of land. One of them was exhausted
and died in a few days, another injured himself for life, but the third,
a famous hunter named Marshall, walked over sixty miles in the day and a
half, greatly to the chagrin of the Indians. See Walton and Brumbaugh's
"Stories of Pennsylvania," p. 39.

^9 Delaware had been granted a separate government as early as 1691, but the
following year Governor Fletcher, of New York, reunited it to Pennsylvania.

^10 Fiske, "Dutch and Quaker Colonies," Vol. II, p. 353.

Citation: "History of the United States of America </>," by Henry William
Elson, The MacMillan Company, New York, 1904. Transcribed by Kathy Leigh.

© 2001-2005 Chris Whitten
directNIC Search <http://search.directnic.com/?aff=9>

END



Sent: Saturday, October 28, 2000 5:03 AM
Subject: [NJSUSSEX-L] Move from Sussex Co to PA & elsewhere

BEGIN

Besides the land grants from the government there were several reasons
folks did not move north and west of the Appalachians in Northern, PA until
late in the 1700s and early 1800s.

1. Questions of clear land title. The northern part of PA was claimed by
CT and NY as well as PA and it took the Continental Congress and the three
states several years to work it out after the Revolution. Under the British
few wanted to buy land from one proprietor group/syndicate and then find
that they in fact did not own the land and either loose it or pay for it
again to the ultimate winner of the dispute. [Main reason southwestern PA
was settled first, was VA had a much clearer title and legitimately was
able to sell land there from 1760s onward, though of course PA as a state's
claim ultimately did win after the Revolution. [One does find NJ folks in
Washington County, PA in 1780s & 90s].  But the Penn family land grant did
not go that far west, so VA had a stronger claim for years to the Monongahela
River Valley as well as the Ohio River. [You may recall that West Virginia
was part of VA until during the Civil War.] There was actually a "war"
fought in the early 1770s in the Wyoming Valley of Luzerne County between
CT settlers and PA settlers.  [CT got the Western Reserve lands in Ohio as
a tradeoff for relinquishing their claims to northern PA in 1789 or so.]
From our earliest days as a nation land/property ownership and claims have
been one of the driving forces for the government. Much of the work of the
Supreme Court for it's first 50 years was to be the ultimate arbitrator
of land claims & disputes between & among states and address individual
complaints about what share some folks did receive.

2. Native Americans still lived in that region until after the American
Revolution and they took sometimes violent exception to colonists moving
into areas the British had given to them by treaty after the French and
Indian war.  This is one of the many reasons the various tribes in PA, NY
and OH & Great Lakes region supported the British in the Revolution. England
had said settlement for whites was to not go over the Allegheny Mountains
or into the Ohio River Valley. They had reserved the area for the Indians,
some of whom had been their allies in the F&I War and the rest they were
trying to appease by treaties. In fact the British government had set up
that whole trans-Appalachian area to be administered by their Canadian
provenance government in the late 1760s to keep it out of the hands of the
colonial activists, politicians and land syndicates from VA, PA, MD, NY &
CT, all lusting for more territory. The British were trying to keep control
and create the landed and class system they had in England in the colonies.
Colonists were not buying it, that is one reason for the rebellion, to get
a change in the land policies and make more available for all the growing
population. Folks like Daniel Boone group to KY and others defied them and
crossed the mountains. But before and through the Revolution they were
a trickle, only a few hundreds who dared take the risk.  Most of the PA
Indians moved to Ohio & Indiana and Canada after the Revolution. During
the period between 1883 and the end of the War of 1812 [in 1817 or so]
the British in Canada encouraged the Indians to stage raids in the frontier
regions and paid bounties at times for keeping settlers out of areas, so the
frontier settlers really did live with threat and risk for two generations
in the late 1700s, even after it was possible to legitimately go live on
the northern PA land.

3. The mountains were a physical obstruction with little easy access
or attraction to farmers.  Mountains & hills, with no roads [the indian
paths were on the top of the ridges, they seldom used the narrow valleys],
totally covered by forest and woods and not much valley floor space with
streams for cultivation anyway. Remember the Conastoga wagon is a creation
of the future that came about partly to deal with this very movement of
folks and goods into, over and through the mountains. Most folks still
would use the river systems to move about as roads were poor at best when
they existed.  So NJ folks who moved on often went south to MD or VA then
up river to Susquehanna, Shenandoah and Monongahela river valley areas in
1760s through 1790s.  After the Articles of the Confederation finalized in
1787 and one knew which state owned the land, and folks had their "grants"
for military service then they finally could go and move 50 -75 miles away
to northern parts of PA and settle the Wyoming Valley and Luzerne County
and points west in PA.  If you ever drive on I80 across the northern
part of PA you will see civilization and settlement never did take over
all of this part of the world, still incredibly forested and undeveloped
with low population compared to the rest of the East coast. Sort of our
empty quarter, the preserve of PA hunters and now parks.  The coal mining
brought more people to parts of the region than anything else ever did.
New Yorkers building the Erie Canal which drained later immigrants and
settlers directly to the Midwest within the next 40 years, and had much to
do with northern PA never becoming heavily populated and settled.  Just a
few of the factors that led to the delayed movement of folks from Sussex
County and northern NJ over the Appalachians / Alleghenies / Poconos &
into PA or southwestern NY for that matter.

END

