
From the Internet ...

BEGIN

Baden-Wurttemberg, Germany

Baden-Wurttemberg, state in southwestern Germany, bounded on the north by
the states of Hesse and Bavaria, on the east by Bavaria, on the south by
Switzerland, and on the west by the state of Rhineland-Palatinate and by
France. Stuttgart is the capital and largest city. Other important cities are
Mannheim, Karlsruhe, Freiburg, Heidelberg, and Ulm. Within Baden-Württemberg
are several mountain regions, including the Black Forest, the Swabian Forest,
the Swabian Alb, and Odenwald. Cutting through these uplands are the Rhine,
Neckar, and Danube rivers and their tributaries. The Lake of Constance
(German Bodensee), the largest inland body of water in western Europe, lies
on the southern border of the state. Area, 35,752 sq km (13,804 sq mi);
population (1990 estimate) 9,822,000.

Baden-Wurttemberg is one of the most prosperous states of Germany, and
is highly industrialized. Manufactures include textiles, motor vehicles,
machinery, chemicals, leather goods, pottery, glass, furniture, clocks,
and optical equipment. Crops including wheat, barley, grapes, potatoes, and
tobacco are grown in the river valleys and foothill regions.  Dairying and
forestry are carried on in the Black Forest and other highland regions. With
its picturesque natural scenery, historic towns and castles, and famous
health resorts, the state is second to Bavaria in tourism. The state, which is
divided into four administrative districts, is headed by a minister-president,
responsible to a popularly elected assembly. The earliest known inhabitants
of Baden were the Alamanni, who fell under the dominion of the Frankish
Empire in the 5th century. In the 11th century Berthold, a duke of the
Austrian duchy of Kärnten (Carinthia), built the castle of Zahrringen
in Breisgau, in Baden; a descendant of his second son took the title of
margrave of Baden and founded a dynasty that ruled the region for more than
eight centuries. One of the outstanding members of this dynasty was Charles
Frederick, who became margrave in 1746. By favoring Napoleon and joining the
Confederation of the Rhine, Charles Frederick quadrupled his possessions in
area and population and acquired in 1803 the dignity of elector and in 1806
the title of grand duke. In 1811 he was succeeded by his grandson Charles,
who, after the Battle of Leipzig, seceded from the Confederation of the
Rhine and in 1815 joined the Germanic Confederation, a loose union of 39
sovereign states, including Prussia, under Austrian presidency.

During the German revolution of 1848 to 1849, the reigning grand duke was
deposed and then reinstated with the aid of Prussia. In 1867 Baden entered
the North German Confederation, and in 1871 it became a part of the German
Empire. Under the empire, the grand dukes of Baden continued to reign with
the help of an elected diet.

At the end of World War I (1914-1918) the ruling dynasties of the German
states were dethroned, and the grand duke Frederick II abdicated on November
22, 1918. On January 15, 1919, a popularly elected national assembly met to
draw up a new constitution. This constitution, issued the following May,
abolished all privileges based on noble birth and religion; bestowed full
legal rights on women; recognized the right of workers, including civil
servants, to organize; and granted the vote to all men and women over 20
years of age. It vested executive power in a cabinet comprising the state
president and his aides, all elected by the legislature. Legislative power
was vested in a unicameral assembly.  Baden became an administrative unit of
the Third Reich in 1935. The area was invaded by the Allied forces in 1945,
during the final stages of World War II.

Following the unconditional surrender of the Third Reich, about a third of
the territory of Baden became part of the United States military occupation
zone in Germany; the remainder became part of the French zone. The
American-occupied sections of Baden and Württemberg, having been merged
for administrative purposes, were organized as the autonomous state of
Württemberg-Baden in 1946. French-occupied Baden became an autonomous state
in the next year. In 1949 both states became components of West Germany. In
1952 the states of Baden, Württemberg-Baden, and Württemberg-Hohenzollern
were merged to form the new state of Baden-Württemberg. In 1990, West and
East Germany united and became the Federal Republic of Germany.

END

