
Sussex County, New Jersey
from the Internet ...

BEGIN

Land Area: 529 sq. mile
Population: 130,943
County Seat: Newton

Bounded by: New York State, Delaware River, Warren, Morris and Passaic
Counties.

Sussex County is situated at the extreme top of New Jersey and has always
been off the beaten path due to it's rural nature. In addition, the rugged
Kittatinny Mountains cut across its entire northwestern edge and the
heavily-wooded New Jersey Highlands rise upward from the Kittatinny Valley
in the eastern part of the county.

This very hilly aspect is what keeps Sussex rural. For one thing, the
rock-strewn hills make usual farming difficult - thus explaining dairy
cattle. For another thing, pockets in the slopes have led to lakes, both
natural and man-made which encourage vacationing rather than permanent
settlement. Finally, the county has thousands acres being used in State parks.

New Jersey's highest point, 1,803 feet above sea level, is at High Point near
the New York border. The Kittatinny Mountains average 1,600 feet above sea
level. The Sussex Highlands range upwards to 1,496 feet above sea level near
Vernon. All of this lake land and mountain land makes for fine scenery. Many
observers agree that New Jersey's scenic best is in Sussex County.

But it was neither cows nor scenery that brought the first Europeans to
Sussex. They were Dutchmen from what is now Kingston, New York, who found
copper on the rocky mountain slope just north of the Delaware Water Gap,
sometime in the 1640's. As they took the ore back along the mountains,
they developed a 140-mile thoroughfare linking the Pahaquarry copper mine
with Esopus (Kingston, New York).

English, Irish, and Scotch immigrants came overland soon after 1700 to the
Kittatinny slopes, which they called the "Blue" mountains.  Germans came up
from Philadelphia in the 1740's, led by John Peter Bernhardt, and Caspar
Shafer, and settled along the Tockhokkonetkong River, now called by the
more easily pronounceable name of Paulins Kill.

Scarcely 600 people lived in the whole Sussex region in 1750 when
settlers began to grumble about going all the way to Morristown for court
business. There were no towns, no major plantations, and little economic
value in the vast area when the colonial legislature created Sussex County
on June 8, 1753.

Leaders of the new county met on November 20, 1753, to grant tavern licenses
and to fix fees for liquor and provender. This reflected a major interest
of the day, since for many decades the tavern keeper was an important man
in Sussex county economic and political circles.

In the spring of 1754, county fathers levied taxes of 100 pounds annually;
most of it to pay bounties for the killing of wolves and panthers. The rest
went to build a log jail so flimsy the sheriff complained he couldn't keep
the prisoners in. The prisoners, in turn. said they wouldn't stay in the
jail if the sheriff couldn't keep the sheep out.

Sussex courts returned temporarily to Morristown in 1757, driven there
by savage Indian uprisings along the Delaware valley. Long bitter over
the loss of their territory, the Indians struck back at white settlers in
1755. Colonial officials appropriated 10,000 pounds in December of that
year to build stone forts along the river.

Most noted of the killings by Indians took place near Swartswood Lake,
where in May 1756, Anthony Swartwout, his wife and a daughter were slain
by the savages, and two younger children became Indian captives.

In 1758 the Indians were persuaded to relinquish their territorial claims
peacefully, but another conflict already was raging in the not-so-peaceful
Sussex hills. That was the New York-New Jersey border conflict which
involved many beatings and shootings in the 50 years after it first broke
out in 1719. Bi-state action fixed the border at its present line in 1769.

1761 saw New Town (now Newton) come to prominence through the actions of
Jonathan Hampton, an Essex county man of some influence in Trenton. The
Legislature authorized the county to build a courthouse and jail a half
mile from Henry Hairlocker's house. When the survey was made, it was found
that the half mile point would have put the courthouse in the middle of a
stream. With this in mind, the "half mile" was stretched and the courthouse
situated halfway up the hill.

On the eve of the Revolution, in 1775, the freeholders boldly announced
that Sussex County would no longer pay the salaries of Royal judges. The war
itself passed Sussex by except for supplies which came from both the fields
and forges of the northern county.  The county also contributed Bonnell
Moody, a well-known Loyalist spy who hid out in a cave near Springdale.

In May 1780, Moody led six men into Newton to free the prisoners in the
jail. Tradition holds that Moody's foray frightened all the local people
out of town and history indicates that Moody was never caught.

The economy of the county suffered considerable during the war due to high
assessments levied to pay for the war. Toward the end of the war and shortly
thereafter their was an influx of big landholders.  Robert Ogden was Sparta's
first permanent settler in 1778, the Ogden family working the mines in the
Sparta Mountains. Other families that started great estates?Lewis Morris,
Thomas Lawrence, John Rutherford, and others.

Building of turnpike between 1804 and 1815
1820 county population was 32,754 making it the most populated in the
     state (Sussex at this time included what is now Warren county)
1824 Warren county is split from Sussex
1830 county population was 20,346
1833, William Rankin founded the private school at Deckertown
1833, Edward Stiles opened a school at Mt. Retirement
1853, a town meeting in Newton rejected the idea of raising money for
      free schools

Citations:

/The New Jersey Almanac/, Tercentenary Edition. Published by the New Jersey
Almanac, Inc. 1963. Pages 529 & 530.

/This is New Jersey from High Point to Cape May/. Cunningham, John T.;
New Brunswick, Rutgers University Press, 1953. pp11-18


* Copyright ©2003 by Brianne Kelly-Bly
This page was last updated on 07/19/03*

END

