
New York
From http://www.negenealogy.com ...

BEGIN

Henry Hudson explored the river that bears his name, and in the 1620s the
Dutch West India Company established settlements at Fort Orange (Albany)
and Manhattan, influencing immigration by other northern Europeans. English,
mostly from New England, came to Long Island where the boundary between New
Netherland and New England had to be settled by treaty in 1650. The Dutch
claimed New Netherland from the New York to the Delaware rivers but were
overthrown in 1664 by the English, who renamed the colony for the Duke of
York. A brief comeback was staged by the Dutch in 1673, but after a year
New York reverted to English control. In 1688-90 New York was part of the
Dominion of New England, and some documents were generated in Boston.

By the time of the Revolutionary War, New Englanders had crossed westward
into the eastern counties of New York, and settlers from Long Island
and New Jersey had migrated to the lower Hudson valley.  Huguenots had
settled in New York City, New Rochelle, and elsewhere in the late 1600s,
and Ulster Scots came to the Hudson area and settled in Orange and Ulster
counties. The first major immigration of Germans to New York was in 1710,
when 847 Palatine families settled in the Hudson Valley.

The Revolution was a major part of New York's history. The British occupied
New York City and controlled all of Long Island and part of Westchester
County. This provided a refuge for many Loyalists, including some from New
Jersey, while patriots fled from Long Island to New York and from elsewhere
up the Hudson. Major battles were fought upstate and every effort was made
to prevent the British from taking control of the Hudson Valley and dividing
the colonies.

Up to the time of the Revolutionary War, New York had been slower to expand
beyond its original settlements than most of the other colonies. Much of the
land had been held by only a few people, and Native Americans threatened
settlement west of the Hudson and Mohawk valleys. After the war, however,
New York grew dramatically.  Migrations and immigrations increased at a rapid
pace, with only a slight interruption during the War of 1812. Immigration was
fueled particularly by Europeans sailing to the port of New York.  The state
became the principal gateway for those heading west, mostly from New England
to the Great Lakes and beyond, although a great number remained as families
made 'chain migrations' across New York (see David Paul Davenport, 'The
Yankee Settlement of New York, 1783-1820,' Genealogical Journal, 17 [1988/89]:
63-, especially 70). Important to settlement were the Old Military Tract and
St. Lawrence Ten Towns in the north; the Military Tract, Chenango Ten Towns,
and Boston Ten Towns in the central region; and the Phelps-Gorham and Holland
purchases further west. Travel was greatly enhanced by the completion of the
Erie Canal in 1825, by which one could get from New York City to Buffalo
in less than three weeks. The Hudson River was linked with Lake Champlain
by a canal in the northeast and with the Delaware River by another in the
southeast. By the mid-1800s, a busy system of stage lines and a network of
railroads carried migrants, business people, and goods over the entire state,
which promoted growth of cities and villages along their paths.

In the nineteenth century, immigrants swarmed through the port of New York,
particularly the Irish and Germans in the mid-1800s, followed by Italians,
Poles, Jews, and others by the turn of the century. Large numbers of blacks
came north after the Civil War and more so after the world wars, followed by
a sizeable Puerto Rican immigration after World War II. Today, many in New
York City, if not born abroad themselves, have at least one parent who was.

New York had disputed areas with Massachusetts in Columbia County and over
six million upstate acres, with New York in Dutchess County, and with Vermont
over the counties of Gloucester, Cumberland, and part of Charlotte. Earlier,
New York lost two of its original twelve counties to Massachusetts: Cornwall
to Maine in 1686 and Dukes in 1692. There was also disagreement over borders
with New Jersey and Pennsylvania. Staten Island, long claimed by New Jersey,
was not fully relinquished until 1855.

Under the Reorganization Act of 7 March 1788, New York was divided into 120
towns (not townships), many of which were already in existence. (In parts of
New York, particularly in the west, land was often surveyed into townships,
and many people today still use the term colloquially.) Towns are the primary
point at which many records are kept and their number has increased greatly
since 1788. Cities and incorporated villages are part of towns, and a town may
have several hamlets and other communities included in its own governments.

Since the turn of the century, the modern city of New York has been
comprised of five boroughs with coterminous counties. While often identified
synonymously with the state of New York, the city is an entity of its own,
and some state laws concerning record keeping do not apply.

END



From the Internet ...

BEGIN

    New York

For more than three centuries England and Holland had been the closest of
friends; but now, at the close of the long and bloody Thirty Years' War, which
ended with the Treaty of Westphalia in 1648, the power of Spain was crushed,
and the Dutch, no longer having anything to fear from his Catholic Majesty,
rose to dispute with the English the dominion of the seas. This brought about
an unfriendly rivalry between the two nations, and the unfriendliness was
increased by the fact that the Dutch of new Netherland traded freely with
the English colonies. They carried great quantities of Virginia tobacco to
Holland, and thus at least [pounds]10,000 a year was lost in customs duties
to the British government.

The first Navigation Law, 1651, was aimed largely at the Dutch trader,
but the wily Dutchman ignored the law and continued as before. This was
one cause that determined the English on the conquest of New Amsterdam.
Another, and probably the chief one, was that the Dutch colony on the Hudson
separated New England from the other English colonies and threatened British
dominion in North America.

The English claimed New Netherland on the ground of the Cabot discoveries;
and Charles II now, 1664, coolly gave the entire country, from the Connecticut
to the Delaware, to his brother James, Duke of York, ignoring the claims of
the Dutch colony, and even disregarding his own charter of two years before
the younger Winthrop. Richard Nicolls of the royal navy set out with a small
fleet and about five hundred of the king's veterans. Reaching New England,
he was joined by several hundred of the militia of Connecticut and Long
Island, and he sailed for the mouth of the Hudson.

Stuyvesant had heard of the fleet's arrival at Boston, but he was made
to believe that its object was to enforce the Episcopal service upon the
Puritans of New England, and so unsuspecting was he that he went far up
the river, to Fort Orange, to quell an Indian disturbance. Here he was
when informed that Nicolls was moving toward New Amsterdam.  Stuyvesant
hastened down the river with all speed, arriving at New Amsterdam but one
day before the English fleet hove into view. Nicolls demanded the surrender
of the fort.  Stuyvesant refused; he fumed and fretted and swore and stamped
his wooden leg. He tore to bits a conciliatory letter sent him by Nicolls.
He mustered his forces for defense. But the people were not with him; they
were weary of his tyrannical government in which they had no part, weary of
enriching a company at their own expense, and the choleric old governor had
to yield. The fort was surrendered (1664) without bloodshed; New Amsterdam
became New York, after the Duke of York; the upper Hudson also yielded,
and Fort Orange became Albany, after another of the duke's titles, and all
New Netherland, including the Delaware Valley, passed under English control.

By what right Charles II seized New Netherland is probably known to kings
and rulers, but not to the humble historian. Queen Elizabeth had laid down
the postulate that mere discovery, without occupation, did not constitute a
right to new lands. This was a good rule when applied to Spain to refute her
claims to North America; it was another story when applied to the English
concerning the Hudson Valley. But the English deftly evaded the difficulty,
to their own satisfaction, by claiming that the Hudson Valley was part of
Virginia as given by James I, in 1606, to two companies. This tract had been
settled at both ends, -- on the James River and the New England coast, --
and why should a foreign power claim the central portion because not yet
occupied? Thus argued the English, and their argument won because sustained
by force of arms.  And yet, the providential hand may easily be seen. The
conquest of New Netherland was scarcely less important than was the conquest
of New France, a century later, on the Plains of Abraham. It all belonged to
the preparation -- not for British dominion in North America, but for the
dominion of future generations that were to occupy the land. Before their
power England was yet to go down, as New Netherland and New France first
went down before hers. Thus England, all unwittingly, became the instrument
in preparing the way and fighting the battles for a nation that was yet to
be born.

It is interesting to note the later career of Peter Stuyvesant. After
a journey to the fatherland to vindicate his course, he returned to New
York and made it the home of his old age. Here on his farm, or "bowery,"
now bounded by Fourth Avenue and the East River, by Sixth and Seventeenth
streets, New York City, amid the scenes of his former strife and turmoil,
he spent a few quiet, happy years. A venerable figure was the aged Dutchman,
and many who had hated him before now learned to love him.

He and Governor Nicolls became warm friends, and many a time they met and
drank wine and told stories at each other's tables. In 1672 this last of
the Dutch governors died at the ripe age of eighty years, and his body was
laid to rest at the little country church near his home -- at a spot now
in the heart of the vast metropolis, whose population is ten times greater
than that of all the North American colonies of that day.

A short war between England and Holland followed the conquest of Nicolls,
and the Dutch sailed up the Thames River and visited fearful punishment on
the English, though they did not win back New York. But nine years after
the Nicolls victory, we may say by anticipation, the two nations were again
at war, and a Dutch fleet reconquered New York and took possession of the
Hudson Valley; but by the treaty of peace the next year the country was
ceded back to the English, and Dutch rule ceased forever in North America.

At the time of the Nichols conquest the little city at the southern point
of Manhattan contained some fifteen hundred people, and the whole province
about ten thousand, one third of whom were English. The colony now became a
proprietary colony, but as the proprietor afterward became king of England,
it was transferred to the list of royal colonies.  Nicolls became the
first governor. He was able and conscientious. The rights of property, of
citizenship, and of religious liberty had been guaranteed in the terms of
capitulation. To these were added at a later date equal taxation and trial
by jury. In one year the tact and energy of Nicolls had transformed the
province practically into an English colony. After four years of successful
rule Nicolls returned to England -- and a few years later, as he stood by
the side of his mater, the Duke of York, at the battle of Solebay, his body
was torn to pieces by a cannon ball.

The English inhabitants of New York had gladly welcomed the change of
government, and even the Dutch had made little resistance, as they were tired
of the tyrannical rule of the company. If there was any bitterness against
English rule remaining, it was wholly removed in 1677 by an event of great
importance to both hemispheres -- the marriage of the leading Hollander
of his times, the Prince of Orange, to the daughter of the Duke of York,
the two afterward to become joint sovereigns of England as William and Mary.

It is interesting to note here the transition in this colony from Dutch to
English rule. It has been claimed by a few writers that our institutions are
derived from Dutch more than from English sources; but a little study into
this subject will easily prove the contrary. The people over whom Nicolls
became governor in 1664 were composed of three separate communities, each
different from the others in its government; the Dutch settlers on the Hudson,
the settlements on the Delaware, and the English towns that had grown up under
Dutch rule on Long Island. Now these English towns during the period of the
Dutch supremacy enjoyed far more liberal local government than did the Dutch
towns on the Hudson.  And in this one respect Kieft, who encouraged popular
government among the English towns, was wiser than Stuyvesant, who opposed
it.^1 These English towns held their popular meetings, chose their officials,
and transacted other business after the manner of the New England towns;
while in the Dutch towns there were no town meetings, no popular elections,
the ruling officials forming a kind of close corporation with power to fill
all vacancies and choose their own successors. As to which of these types
came nearer being the model for our local government of to-day, no reader
need be informed.

When Nicolls became governor he made little immediate change in the general or
local government except to adopt English titles for the public officers. To
understand this two things must be remembered.  First, the charter for New
York, true to the Stuart instinct, made the Duke of York absolute master, and
it made no provision for the people to take any part in their own government;
second, it was practically such a government that Nicolls already found in New
Amsterdam. With a ready-made machine at hand, why should he take the trouble
to make a new one? He proceeded, however, to frame a code of laws known as
"The Duke's Laws." These were intended at first for the English settlers
only, but where later extended to all. This code was borrowed largely from
the laws of New England, with the two important omissions that there was no
provision for the people to take any part in the government, and that there
was no religious test for citizenship. It retained many Dutch features,
and introduced a few new features. To the Court of Assizes, consisting of
governor and council, sheriff and justice, was assigned the legislative
and judicial power; but as the sheriff and justices were appointees of the
governor, there was no popular government in the plan.

But this plan did not prove permanent. The English portion of the colony
clamored for representative government. The agitation continued until
1681, Edmund Andros being then governor, when the English population was
ready to break into open rebellion, unless their demand for an assembly be
granted. Accordingly the next year the duke promised the people an assembly,
and the first one was elected in 1683, while Thomas Dongan was governor. This
assembly composed of eighteen men elected by the people, now proceeded to
adopt a declaration of rights known as the "Charter of Liberties," by which
it declared the representatives of the people coordinate with the governor
and council, and that no taxes could be laid without their consent. It also
provided that all laws be subject to the duke's approval.

What might have been the fate of this charter under normal conditions we know
not, as the conditions were suddenly changed. The duke's royal brother was
suddenly carried off by a stroke of apoplexy, and the duke became king of
England as James II. New York now became a royal colony, and the new king,
who at heart despised popular government, refused to sign the Charter of
Liberties, abolished the New York assembly, and sent Andros to govern the
colony as consolidated with New England and New Jersey. Andros, with a council
of seven men, was to govern nine colonies as a conquered province. We have
noticed his career in Boston and need not repeat it here. The fall of his
master from the British throne occasioned the immediate fall of Andros;
but this did not bring immediate peace to New York. The colony was now
about to pass through another exciting experience.

But first, a further word is here in place concerning the sources of our
present governmental system. Mr. Douglas Campbell, in two large volumes
entitled "The Puritan in England, Holland, and America," has taken great
pains to show that we are indebted far more to Dutch than to English sources
for our system, and his attempt to prove too much leads the critical reader
to believe too little.

It is true that the English race is more nearly related to the Dutch than
to any other, and the English language resembles the Dutch language more
than any other. It is also true that the Netherlands preceded England in
securing religious liberty and in establishing free public schools; that the
manufacturing of textile fabrics developed in Flanders earlier than in the
island kingdom across the channel, where it grew up later largely through
the migration of skilled workmen from the Netherlands; that many thousands
of Dutchmen and Flemings, driven from their country by religious wars,
made their permanent home in England.  From these facts it will be seen
that the influence of Netherlands institutions on English civilization must
have been great; and it was probably still great on American civilization,
because the Dutch immigrants to England nearly all became Puritans, and
there is no doubt that Dutch blood coursed in the veins of a large per cent
of the New England Puritans.^2 No doubt also the Pilgrim Fathers absorbed
something from the Dutch during their sojourn in Leyden.

But when all is said on this side it must be added, on the other, that
in the seventeenth century English popular self-government was ages in
advance of the same in the Netherlands. No better proof of this is needed
than a glance at the colony of New York. It was the English towns, even
under Dutch jurisdiction, that demanded and received a large measure of
self-government; it was the first English governor that extended that great
bulwark of Anglo-Saxon liberty, the jury system, to the Dutch settlers, who
at first shunned it as a thing to be feared; it was the English population
of the colony that clamored for their birthright -- an assembly and the
power of taxation. During all this period the Dutch settlers in the main
were passive in matters of popular government, and but for the coming of
the English and the overthrow of Stuyvesant and his nation, New Netherland
might have remained as despotic a government as was New France. Moreover,
the New England free school system grew, not from Dutch models, but from
the inherent character of the Puritan religion. In the face of these facts,
how can Mr. Campbell or any one contend that our institutions of to-day
are derived from Dutch rather than from English sources?

News of the accession of William and Mary and of the imprisonment of Andros
at Boston created a great excitement in New York; and the militia, led by
Jacob Leisler, a German merchant, took possession of the government. For two
years Leisler, with the aid of his son-in-law, Milborne, governed the colony
with vigor and energy. But he offended the aristocracy and the magistrates,
who pronounced him a usurper. Meantime he took measures to defend the
colony against the French and Indians, who had fallen on the frontier town
of Schenectady, had massacred the people, and had burned the town.

The Leisler movement was in part the outgrowth of the anti-Catholic wave
that swept over England and her colonies during the reign of James II,
and Leisler's vivid imagination greatly magnified the danger of a general
religious war. He called for the election of an assembly to vote taxes for
the pending war with Canada, but many of the people denied his authority
and refused to respond.

Leisler's next step was one that marked the beginning of great things.
He called for a meeting in New York of delegates from all the colonies to
make preparations for the war, and the seven delegates that met, chiefly
from New England, constituted the first colonial congress in America.^3
They took counsel concerning the war, which will be noticed in our chapter
on Colonial Wars. The clouds were now darkening around the head of Leisler,
and his career was almost over.

In 1691 Henry Sloughter was appointed governor, and he sent his lieutenant
before him to demand the surrender of the fort. But the lieutenant could
not prove his authority, and Leisler refused to surrender. At length,
when Sloughter arrived, Leisler yielded to his authority and quiet was soon
restored. But Leisler's enemies were determined on his destruction. He and
his son-in-law had been cast into prison, and Governor Sloughter, a weak
and worthless man, was induced to sign their death warrants while drunk,
tradition informs us. Before the governor had fully recovered his senses,
Leisler and Milborne were taken from the prison and hanged. Leisler had
doubtless been legally in the wrong in seizing the government; but his
intentions were undoubtedly good, and his execution, after all danger was
past, was little else than political murder, and it created two hostile
factions in New York that continued for many years.

With the passing of Leisler the royal government was restored, and the
people for the first time secured the permanent right to take part in their
government, as in the other colonies, and, as in the others, the assembly
steadily gained power at the expense of the governor, The royal governors sent
to New York were, for the most part, men without principle or interest in the
welfare of the people. A rare exception we find in the Earl of Bellamont,
who brief three years at the close of the century as governor of New York,
Massachusetts, and New Hampshire were all too brief for the people, who
had learned to love him as few royal governors were loved. His successor,
Lord Cornbury, was probably the most dissolute rascal ever sent to govern
an American colony, not even excepting the infamous Sothel of the Carolinas.

An event of great interest occurred in New York in 1735, known as the Zenger
case. Governor Cosby had entered suit before the Supreme Court of New York
to obtain a sum of money and had lost. He then removed the judge and thus
offended the popular party. Peter Zenger, the publisher of a newspaper,
the /New York Weekly Journal/, attacked the governor through its columns and
severely criticised his action. The governor was enraged at these attacks,
and he ordered the paper burned and the editor arrested for libel.

At the trial, Zenger was defended by Andrew Hamilton of Philadelphia, the
greatest lawyer in America. The justice of the cause and the eloquence of
Hamilton won the jury, and resulted in a complete victory for the accused
editor. This was the first important victory for the liberty of the press
in America, and with little variation this liberty has been held inviolate
from that time to the present.

A few years after Zenger's case had been disposed of, New York society was
greatly convulsed by the so-called Negro Plot. This was a craze similar to
the witchcraft delusion which had swept over Massachusetts half a century
before. It had it origin in a general belief that the Spanish Catholic
priests, in league with the slave population, were planning to burn the
city. The craze spread like an epidemic; the whole community went made,
and before the storm abated, twenty-two persons, four of whom were whites,
had been hanged, thirteen negroes burnt at the stake, and a large number
transported. The craze soon passed away and the people recovered their
normal senses. The account of this affair constitutes the most deplorable
chapter in the history of New York. It is now believed that no plot to
burn the city existed, and that every one who suffered on account of the
delusion was innocent.

The province of New York grew steadily to the time of the Revolution.
Every decade witnessed the coming of home seekers in large numbers to the
valley of the Hudson. French Protestants, Scotch, Irish, Scotch-Irish,
refugees from the Rhenish palatinate, and others spread over the beautiful
river valleys; but the great majority of the people were English and Dutch. By
1750 the population was probably eighty thousand and this number was more
than doubled by the opening years of the Revolution.

New York City was a busy mart indeed, containing some twelve thousand people
in 1750, and more than five hundred vessels, great and small, plowed the
waters that half surrounded it. The city was the political, social, and
business center of the province. Among its leading figures in winter were
great landholders of the Hudson Valley and Long Island, who spent their
summers on their estates. But the great middle class, composed chiefly of
tradesmen of every grade, made up the majority of the population.

*Footnotes*

^1 See McKinley, in "American Historical Review," Vol. VI, p. 18.
^2 Fiske's "Dutch and Quaker Colonies," Vol. I, p. 47.
^3 First Colonial Congress, 1690.

Citation: "History of the United States of America </>," by Henry William
Elson, The MacMillan Company, New York, 1904. Chapter VII pp. 138-146.
Transcribed by Kathy Leigh.

© 2001-2005 Chris Whitten
directNIC Search <http://search.directnic.com/?aff=9>

END

