
From the Internet ...

BEGIN

In the Year 1902 ...

The average life expectancy in the U.S. was 47 years.
Only 14 Percent of the homes in the U.S. had a bathtub.
Only 8 percent of the homes had a telephone.
A three-minute call from Denver to New York City cost eleven dollars.
There were only 8,000 cars in the U.S., and only 144 miles of paved roads.
The maximum speed limit in most cities was 10 mph.
Alabama, Mississippi, Iowa, and Tennessee were each more heavily populated
  than California.
With a mere 1.4 million people, California was only the 21st most populous
  state in the Union.
The tallest structure in the world was the Eiffel Tower.
The average wage in the U.S. was 22 cents an hour.
The average U.S. worker made between $200 and $400 per year.
A competent accountant could expect to earn $2000 per year,
  a dentist made $2,500 per year,
  a veterinarian $1,500 per year,
  and a mechanical engineer about $5,000 per year.
More than 95 percent of all births in the U.S. took place at home.
Ninety percent of all U.S. doctors had NO COLLEGE EDUCATION!  Instead,
  they attended so-called medical schools, many of which were condemned
  in the press AND the government as "substandard."
Sugar cost four cents a pound.
Eggs were fourteen cents a dozen.
Coffee was fifteen cents a pound.
Most women only washed their hair once a month, and used borax or egg
  yolks for shampoo.
Canada passed a law that prohibited poor people from entering into their
  country for any reason.
The five leading causes of death in the U.S. were:
  1. Pneumonia and influenza
  2. Tuberculosis
  3. Diarrhea
  4. Heart disease
  5. Stroke
The American flag had 45 stars.  Arizona, Oklahoma, New Mexico, Hawaii,
  and Alaska hadn't been admitted to the Union yet.
The population of Las Vegas, Nevada, was 30.
Crossword puzzles, canned beer, and iced tea hadn't been invented.
There was no Mother's Day or Father's Day.
One in ten U.S. adults couldn't read or write. Only 6 percent of all
  Americans had graduated high school.
18 percent of households in the U.S. had at least one full-time servant
  or domestic.
Marijuana, heroin, and morphine were all available over the counter at
  the local corner drugstores. Back then pharmacists said, "Heroin clears
  the complexion, gives buoyancy to the mind, regulates the stomach and
  bowels, and is, in fact, a perfect guardian of health."
There were only about 230 reported murders in the entire U.S.
Shriners Hospitals had not been started yet.

END

