
Some info concerning the Revolutionary War:

BEGIN

From: Jim Elbrecht <jelbrech@nycap.rr.com>

>During our Revolutionary War did a draft exist?  Or was it strictly a
>volunteer effort?

A draft existed, but rather than on a federal level, the Congress told each
State how many men they needed to supply, and the states raised the men
through draft or enticement.  [and drafted to fill their own state militias]

I don't know of the percentage of drafted men, but I suspect it was a
fairly high number judging from the number of pensioners who note that
they were drafted.  [though those numbers are skewed to include more of
the younger men as the files of pensioners before 1814 are mostly burned--
by the time the hardship pensions of 1818 were approved, the youngest of
RevWar vets was in his late 50's--- and general pensions to all RevWar vets
weren't approved until 1831]

>If a female wanted to fight along side the males would she be turned down?

There were camp followers in most camps that consisted of women and children.
I suspect that there were many women, who like Molly Pitcher, picked up their
husband's, or another fallen man's weapon and pitched in during a battle.

I don't recall ever hearing of a woman being carried on the rolls of a
company under her own name, though I have to admit I've never read any
of the books referenced on; http://www.americanrevolution.org/nguyen.html
[A piece titled "American Athenas" on Ed St Germain's great site.]

>Were there age limits?  If an 80 year old man wanted to enlist would he
>be allowed?  Was there a minimum age limit?  What about physical handicaps?

The most often cited ages I see for draft limits are 16-60.  They varied
from state to state.   I've seen men who said they were as young as 12 be
approved for pensions.   On the upper end, I think any man who they thought
could take the physical aspects would be eligible. [I think 80 is pushing
it for most services--- spying and commissary work might be exceptions]

>Did it occur that men paid others to fight in their stead during the
>Revolutionary War?  Is there any data as to how often this occured?

The draft was set up in MA, so that if you were drafted, you could either
serve or pay the town/county who drafted you.  Abigail Adams writes to
John that she suspects some of the local boards are drafting those who they
think will pay first, thus raising more money to wage the war.

I've seen several mentions of substitutes in the pension files I've been
reading lately.   The two who identified the relationship between themselves
and the man they were substituting for were an apprentice, subbing for his
master, and a brother substituting for an older brother who had crops to
get in. [most of the drafts were for a few months at a time]

>If a man were physically qualified to fight and he was sympathetic to
>the cause what would be the reasons that he wouldn't join the fight?
>Financial and/or family hardships?  Anything else?

Fear?[translated by one who knows as 'smarter than the average bear']

Religion?  Quakers & Moravians & maybe some other religions might have been
adverse to their followers taking up arms. [though I have a Quaker in my
tree who refused to sign an oath in 1776-- but in 1778, when the war came
to his town, he joined the militia.]

Too far from the war to make it 'personal'?  Another thing Abigail Adams
writes to John is how apathetic their neighbors seemed to get once the
British were driven from Boston.

It is an interesting question.  So often we see "Why did they fight?"
I never thought of the opposite.

Come on down to news:soc.history.war.us-revolution and pose your questions
there.  We can always use a new thread or two.

Jim
[another venue would be AMERICAN-REVOLUTION-L@rootsweb.com -- that's a flame
& spam free zone that is also populated by lots of "folks who know stuff"]

>At this point it's more a matter of me just trying to learn more.  There
>was a LAKE clan which settled in Gravesend on Long Island in the 1600s.
>A few of the LAKEs removed to Hunterdon Co, NJ in the mid 1700s.  I've
>traced my LAKE line back to Hunterdon Co, but in my attempt to connect
>with the LAKEs which came from LI I've hit a wall.  The wall occurs
>around the time of the Rev War.

Those were particularly odd times in that part of the world from 1776-1783.
There was always a British presence -- and often a rebel one too.  The British
troops on Staten Island  tripled their population.  New York City was
completely under British control.  The most active rebels of both places
fled, many of them to northern NJ.  Yet there were still many Loyalists
there & there were frequent accounts of vandalism by both sides.

With Trenton in the mix, I think I'd add Church of England to the religions
where a person might sympathize with the rebels, but not act on it.  The
Hunterdon Co CofE pastors seemed to be even more supportive of the British
than the church on Staten Island which was occupied throughout the war. [that
church was closed after a while in part because no pastors would live on
Staten Island because of the risk of raids by the "New Jersey banditti"]

I'd also suspect 'protection of property' as a reason to refuse.  Both
proclaimed loyalists and proclaimed rebels were subject to vandalism or
worse from their neighbors in that area.  Perhaps he was just trying to
stay neutral.  [or maybe he was a displaced Staten/Long Islander who didn't
want to give a loyalist on the Island an excuse to burn his house.  And when
they did anyway, he went ahead and signed a congressional proclamation?]

This page gives a 'quick' rundown of the Trenton area in the Revolution.
http://freepages.history.rootsweb.com/~trenton/historyoftrenton/revolutionary.htm
[They have a 'refusal case' there, too & they read the first two words as
"Sur Recognizance" -- though I still don't recognize the term.]

-snip-
>From court minutes in Hunterdon Co, NJ ...
>
>October Term Minutes 1777
>
>The State
>   vs
>John Lake
>
>? ? for refusing the test.  The Def. appears still refusing.  It is
>ordered that he be fined [monetary unit] 75 & that process issue in
>one month.
>
>The first two words look like "Sur Recog.".

>What kind of a test might this be?  A test proving loyalty to the rebels?

Yes.  And I wouldn't put it past the good politicians of the day to use them
the same as the draft in MA.  i.e.; Ask those who you know won't sign to
swear loyalty. . .  They refuse. . . you fine them . ..  next month repeat
the process.  Kind of like a 'sin tax.'

75 pounds is a hefty fine if it is pounds. [Rev Frazer, mentioned on the site
above, was fined 20- though his bail a month or so earlier was 100pounds]
In NJ in 1777, it is possible to be NJ dollars, Continental dollars or
pounds. [for official business, anyway.  Regular folks were as likely to
use spanish dollars, or french money, or whatever.]

There was still 5-6 more years of war for Mr Lake to 'see the light',
though.  There were many who believed in 1776 that the war would only last
a few months.  Many kept thinking the end was imminent for years. [hopes
kept alive by the excellent propagandists of both sides.]

There were loads of folks who were neutral, loyalist, *and* rebel at different
times through the war.  Seven years is a long time to re-assess your feelings.

From: Jim Elbrecht <jelbrech@nycap.rr.com>

>Can you make any reading suggestions (books or Web sites) for what it
>was like living in the Gravesend LI area in the mid 1700s ?

http://lihistory.com/ is a good bet.

Stiles' "History of Brooklyn" is online.  The section on Brooklyn in the
Revolution starts here;
http://www.panix.com/~cassidy/stilesv1/v1c1/toc6.html
[a nicely laid  out site that is as easy to browse through as reading the
book would be]

My folks just seemed to have passed through Brooklyn in the
19th century, so I haven't looked much at the earlier history of
Brooklyn.  But the Brooklyn Rootsweb site is chock full of things--
http://freepages.genealogy.rootsweb.com/~blkyn/Bklyn.Info.Page.html

Nancy Lutz also runs the very busy, but informative [though mostly 19-20th
century lately] NYBROOKLYN-L@rootsweb.com .  A search of their archives
would be a good bet.

[and for those who didn't follow the jump from Gravesend, Long Island to
Brooklyn. . .  Brooklyn is on the westernmost end of Long Island.  It *is*
essentially Kings County, one of the 5 burroughs of NY.  Gravesend was once
an independent town, but is now a neighborhood in Brooklyn.]

END



from http://www.serve.com/rbriggs/couriers/3-96/transport.html ...

BEGIN

Transporting the British Army.

By Mark Tully- Illustration by Jeff Saeger

With the exception of many of the Loyalist corps, every single man of
the Crown forces in America made the often treacherous journey across the
Atlantic to America. Being confined to a cramped ship at sea for six to
eleven weeks is an ordeal we can scarcely imagine today, and it must have
been a true test of the common soldier's patience, endurance, and sanity.(1)

Sending troops overseas was an expensive proposition for the Crown. One
account states that it cost over [pounds]30 sterling to send each man
overseas, and admits that this is a conservative estimate. There were
almost 30,000 men present at Long Island and by the above estimate the
cost of transporting and supplying this force must have been more than one
million pounds.(2)

Having the soldiers arrive in America healthy was of paramount concern,
as sick or dead troops incurred the additional expense of caring for or
replacing them.(3)

As with any excursion, there were rules and regulations that had to be
followed on board the transport ships in order to make the journey safe,
healthy, and orderly. The following are the official orders and instructions
for His Majesty's troops on their embarking for North America:

"The commanding officer is to take care that every morning all the men be
brought up on deck, the births cleaned and the bedding brought up to air
if the weather will permit.

That no smoaking be permitted between decks.

That no gaming be allowed nor shall any person be suffered to vend or
distribute drams of spirituous liqueurs.  That as many men as possible be
kept on deck in the day time. If any transports should be put into any port
or harbour, no officer or soldier is to go on shore but by the consent of
the officer commanding the troops on board such transports  and when any
soldiers are allowed to go on shore a non-commissioned officer is to go
with them who is to be answerable for their conduct while on shore.

The Commanding Officer will acquaint the regiment that in order to contribute
towards the expence of provisions on board the paymaster General of the
forces is directed to make a deduction of 3p per diem from every officer,
non commissioned officer and soldier borne upon the full establishment of
the regiment during the time of their being on board ship and the Colonel
is ordered to take care that the agent or paymaster stop no more form any
officer, non commissioned officer or soldier on account of provisions than
the said 3p per diem, the commander of the transports certifying that the
number of days that the troops shall have been on board their ships.

Upon arrival of the regiment in North America, the Commanding Officer is to
follow such orders as he shall from time to time receive from his excellency
the Honourable Lieutenant General Gage, or the Officer commander in chief
of His Majesty's forces in those parts for the time being.

Given at the War Office this 15th day of August 1775 by MMC Barrington."(4)

Notice that the officers and men were expected to help pay for their transport
by a maximum of 3d (three pence) per day. Carrying an entire regiment
"across the pond" on a simple six or eight-week journey could therefore net
the Captain of a transport somewhere close to 50,400d ([pounds]210). This
was considered a tidy sum in the 18th-century, and some voyages could net
the ship's owner two or three times that amount.(5)

NOTES:

1) The ship that carried Stephen Kemble made the trip in seven weeks (Kemble,
Journals of Lieut.- Col. Stephen Kemble, 1773-1789, Gregg Press), it took
Thomas Anburey's transport 11 weeks to make the journey (Anburey, Thomas,
Travels Through the Interior Parts of America in a Series of Letters by an
Officer, New York Times and Arno Press, 1969, Vol. I, p 15, Oct 8, 1776),
Johann Ewald spent a total of 21 weeks on shipboard en route to America
(Captain Johann Ewald, Diary of the American War, Yale University Press,
1979, p 7), and four companies of the 55th Regiment arrived safe and sound
after a journey of 25 weeks (Kemble, p 62; P.R.O. Colonial Office series
C.O. 5/5, p 61)!

2) Bell, John, An Inquiry into the Causes which Produce, and the Maens of
Prevneting Diseases among British Officers, Soldiers, & Others in the West
Indes, F. J. Murray, London, 1791, (page B2).

3) ibid.

4) Public Records Office, Kew, England; War Office Series WO 26/29.

5) The figures are based on the old currency system in which there are 240
pence in a pound. James Boswell, as a young, affluent Scottish gentleman,
was receiving an annual allowance of [pounds]200 in 1763, and was living
quite comfortably (Boswell's London Journal, Edited by Frederick A. Pottle,
McGraw Hill, 1950, p.336).

END



from https://revolutionarywar.us/facts/

BEGIN

Revolutionary War Facts

1) There were two Boston tea parties: Between 50 or 60 "Sons of Liberty,"
disguised as Mohawks, protested the 3 cents per pound British tax on tea
by dumping chests of the popular drink into Boston Harbor on December 16,
1773. Fewer know that the improper Bostonians repeated the performance on
March 7, 1774. The two tea parties cost the British around $3 million in
modern money.

2) Benjamin Franklin wrote the first Declaration of Independence:
In 1775, Franklin, disgusted with the arrogance of the British and
appalled by the bloodshed at Lexington and Concord, wrote a Declaration
of Independence. Thomas Jefferson was enthusiastic. But, he noted, many
other delegates to the Continental Congress were "revolted at it." It would
take another year of bitter conflict to persuade the Congress to vote for
the Declaration of Independence written by Jefferson -- with some astute
editorial suggestions by Franklin.

3) History's first submarine attack took place in New York Harbor in 1776: The
Connecticut inventor David Bushnell called his submarine the Turtle because
it resembled two large tortoise shells of equal size joined together. The
watertight hull was made of 6-inch-thick oak timbers coated with tar. On
September 6, 1776, the Turtle targeted the HMS Eagle, flagship of the British
fleet. The submarine was supposed to secure a cask of gunpowder to the hull
of the Eagle and sneak away before it exploded. Unfortunately, the Turtle
got entangled with the Eagle's rudder bar, lost ballast and surfaced before
the gunpowder could be planted.

4) Benedict Arnold was the best general in the Continental Army: "Without
Benedict Arnold in the first three years of the war," says the historian
George Neumann, "we would probably have lost the Revolution." In 1775,
the future traitor came within a whisker of conquering Canada. In 1776,
he built a fleet and fought a bigger British fleet to a standstill on Lake
Champlain. At Saratoga in 1777, his brilliant battlefield leadership forced
the British army to surrender. The victory persuaded the French to join the
war on the American side. Ironically, Arnold switched sides in 1780 partly
because he disapproved of the French alliance.

5) ??

6) George Washington was the best spymaster in American History: He ran
dozens of espionage rings in British-held New York and Philadelphia, and the
man who supposedly could not tell a lie was a genius at disinformation. He
constantly befuddled the British by leaking, through double agents, inflated
reports on the strength of his army.

7) By 1779, there were more Americans fighting with the British than with
Washington: There were no less than 21 regiments (estimated to total 6,500
to 8,000 men) of loyalists in the British army. Washington reported a field
army of 3,468. About a third of Americans opposed the Revolution.

8) At Yorktown, the victory that won the war, Frenchman outnumbered
Americans almost three to one: Washington had 11,000 men engaged in the
battle, while the French had at least 29,000 soldiers and sailors. The 37
French ships-of-the-line played a crucial role in trapping the 8,700 strong
British army and winning the engagement.

9) King George almost abdicated the throne when the British lost: After
Yorktown, George III vowed to keep fighting. When parliament demurred, the
King wrote a letter of abdication -- then withdrew it. He tried to console
himself with the thought that Washington would become a dictator and make
the Americans long for royal rule. When he was told that Washington planned
to resign his commission, the monarch gasped: "If he does that, sir, he
will be the greatest man in the world."

10) The word "independence" never appears in the Declaration of Independence -
rather, it's titled "The unanimous Declaration of the thirteen united States
of America."

11) The Olive Branch Petition was adopted by the Second Continental Congress
on July 5, 1775 in a final attempt to avoid a full-on war between Great
Britain and the thirteen colonies represented in that Congress. The Congress
had already authorized the invasion of Canada more than a week earlier, but
the petition affirmed American loyalty to Great Britain and beseeched King
George III to prevent further conflict.  In August 1775, the colonies were
formally declared to be in rebellion by the Proclamation of Rebellion, and the
petition was rejected by Great Britain, even though King George had refused
to read the Olive Branch Petition before declaring the colonists traitors.

12) George Washington's dentures: They weren't made of wood, as legend
has it, but rather of hippopotamus ivory and cows' teeth, held in place by
metal springs.

13) Desertion was such a problem during the war that George Washington
actually expected the Continental Army to dissolve. When the Revolution
began, American soldiers were enthusiastic about fighting for the cause of
independence. But as the war dragged on and the hardships of campaigning
mounted, once-eager volunteers began to melt away in droves. In fact, prior
to the victory at Trenton in late 1776, as many as half of Washington's
men had absconded.

14) National lotteries were established to help finance the war. Unlike
the well equipped British redcoats, the American army was a rag-tag rabble
with insufficient resources even at the best of times. At the war's outset,
Congress tried to raise money for the nascent military through a series of
national lotteries. Four such draws were held in 1777, raising more than
$1.5 million for the cause while paying out a top prize of $50,000 along
with tens of thousands of lesser cash rewards. Funds raised helped pay for
goods, which were sorely needed in Washington's shanty army camps.

15) Soldiers and officers in the Continental Army went months, if not
years, without pay. In the autumn of 1782, Continental officers in the
Hudson Highlands were seething over the fact that they had not been paid
in months - in some cases, years. Eventually, this mounting frustration
led to a budding army insurrection known as the Newburgh Conspiracy, which
Washington fortunately snuffed out.

16) The Continentals used cash incentives to recruit talent. While the
Declaration of Independence specifically condemned the British use of paid
mercenaries to suppress the rebellion (like the Hessians), the Continental
Army lured recruits to its cause with cold hard cash. During the Revolutionary
War, a young man would receive a "bounty"-a cash award- if he signed
up to fight the British.

17) The British Army was supported by German mercenaries, nicknamed
Hessians. Over 30,000 Hessian soldiers were hired to fight against the
American rebels during the Revolutionary War - equivalent to one quarter
of the British force.

18) The Peace Treaty of Paris 1783 was signed on September 3, 1783 and ended
the American Revolutionary War between Great Britain and the United States
of America.

19) The 13 colonies were Delaware, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Georgia,
Connecticut, Massachusetts Bay, Maryland, South Carolina, New Hampshire,
Virginia, New York, North Carolina, and Rhode Island.

20) Compared to the ratio of the population, The War of Independence was
the second-deadliest American conflict after the Civil War.

21) In 1776, the population of the 13 American colonies was estimated at
2.4 million. 85% of the white population was of British descent, with 9%
of German origin and 4% Dutch.

22) American colonies had difficulties raising troops due to the economic
need to stay on a farm. About 90% of the American population worked on farms.

23) The largest battle of the war took place on August 27, 1776. British
troops gained control of New York. It is known as the Battle of Long Island
and also the Battle of Brooklyn Heights.

24) In 1778, France formally entered the war against Great Britain,
recognizing the independence of the United States.

25) In 1779, Spain secretly joined the war as an ally of France and America,
hoping to capture Gibraltar and British colonies in the Caribbean.

26) George Washington was appointed commander of the Continental Army on
June 14, 1775. He would not return to Mount Vernon until 6 years later.

27) Many Loyalists moved to England after the war ended. A lot of them lost
their fortunes and land that they had built up over years in the Americas. In
some cases, the British government paid them for their loyalty, but it was
usually not nearly as much as they had lost.

28) Although Britain had the most powerful navy in the world in 1776,
Patriot forces managed to recruit privateers (armed ships commissioned
by the government to attack foreign powers) to fight for the fledgling
country. Nearly 800 vessels were commissioned, and they ultimately captured or
destroyed approximately 600 British ships. It's estimated that the privateers
caused about $18 million in damage to British shipping by the end of the war,
over $302 million in today's dollars.

29) Mohawks and other members of the Iroquois Confederacy fought for the
British in the northeast, while tribes in the Ohio country tried to remain
neutral. In 1778 at the Treaty of Fort Pitt, the Delawares and Americans
agreed to "perpetual peace and friendship." But when the Patriots killed
noncombatant Moravian Delawares, the Ohio Native Americans joined the British,
and continued to fight American westward expansion long after the war.

30) A significant amount of Loyalists were African-American slaves. The
British promised to free the slaves from their Patriot masters and around
50,000 slaves (roughly 10% of the total slave population in the 1770s)
fled their masters to side with the Loyalists.

31) The United States government wanted Loyalists to stay in the country. The
skills, education and knowledge of the loyalists were seen as important
assets to the new country. Despite that, very few Loyalists chose to remain
in the United States.

32) Patriots (also known as Revolutionaries, Continentals, Rebels, or
American Whigs) were those colonists of the Thirteen Colonies who rebelled
against British control during the American Revolution. In July 1776, they
declared the United States of America an independent nation. Their rebellion
was based on the political philosophy of republicanism, as expressed by
spokesmen such as Thomas Jefferson, John Adams and Thomas Paine. They were
opposed by the Loyalists who instead supported continued British rule.

33) Loyalists were American colonists who remained loyal to the British Crown
during the Revolutionary War. At the time they were often called Tories,
Royalists, or King's Men. They were opposed by the Patriots, those who
supported the revolution and called them "persons inimical to the liberties
of America". Prominent Loyalists repeatedly assured the British government
that many thousands of loyalists would spring to arms and fight for the crown.

The British government acted in expectation of that, especially in the
southern campaigns in 1780-81. In practice, the number of loyalists
in military service was far lower than expected. Across the colonies,
Patriots watched suspected Loyalists very closely, and would not tolerate
any organized Loyalist opposition.

34) When their cause was defeated, about 15% of the Loyalists (65,000-70,000
people) fled to other parts of the British Empire, to Britain itself, or
to British North America (now Canada). The southern colonists moved mostly
to Florida, which had remained loyal to the Crown, and to British Caribbean
possessions, often bringing along their slaves.

Northern Loyalists largely migrated to Ontario, Quebec, New Brunswick,
and Nova Scotia. They called themselves United Empire Loyalists. Most
were compensated with Canadian land or British cash distributed through
formal claims procedures. Loyalists who left the U.S. received £3 million,
or about 37% of their losses, from the British government. Loyalists who
stayed in the U.S. were generally able to retain their property and become
American citizens.

35) Historians have estimated that between 15 and 20 percent of the 2 million
whites in the colonies in 1775 were Loyalists, or about 300,000-400,000 men,
women and children.

Continental Navy:

1) 5,000 sailors (peak 1779)

2) 53 frigates and sloops (total served)

3) State Navies: 106 ships (total served)

4) Privateers: 55,000 sailors (total served), 1,697 ships

5) Allies: 146 ships-of-the-line (1782)

6) The main goal of the navy was to intercept shipments of British matériel
and generally disrupt British maritime commercial operations. The initial
fleet consisted of converted merchantmen because of the lack of funding,
manpower, and resources, with exclusively designed warships being built
later in the conflict. The vessels that successfully made it to sea met
with success only rarely, and the effort contributed little to the overall
outcome of the war.

7) The United States Navy recognizes October 13, 1775 as the date of its
official establishment, the passage of the resolution of the Continental
Congress at Philadelphia that created the Continental Navy.

8) Of the approximately 65 vessels (new, converted, chartered, loaned,
and captured) that served at one time or another with the Continental Navy,
only 11 survived the war. The Treaty of Paris in 1783 ended the Revolutionary
War and, by 1785, Congress had disbanded the Continental Navy and sold the
remaining ships. Factors leading to the dissolution of the Navy included a
general lack of money, the loose confederation of the states, a change of
goals from war to peace, and more domestic and fewer foreign interests.

9) The frigate USS Alliance fired the final shots of the Revolutionary War;
it was also the last ship in the Navy. A faction within Congress wanted to
keep her, but the new nation did not have the funds to keep her in service,
and she was auctioned off for $26,000.

10) The Continental Marines were the marine force of the American Colonies
during the American Revolutionary War. The Corps was formed by the Continental
Congress on November 10, 1775 and was disbanded in 1783. Their mission
was multi-purpose, but their most important duty was to serve as onboard
security forces, protecting the captain of a ship and his officers. During
naval engagements Marine sharpshooters were stationed in the fighting tops
of the ships' masts, and were supposed to shoot the opponent's officers,
naval gunners, and helmsmen.

11) In all, there were 131 Colonial Marine officers and probably no more
than 2,000 enlisted Colonial Marines. Though individual marines were
enlisted for the few American naval vessels, the organization would not
be re-created until 1798. Despite the gap between the disbanding of the
Continental Marines and the current organization, the United States Marine
Corps celebrates November 10, 1775 as its birthday.

12) Since they didn't have money for a big navy, the Continental Congress
hired privateers, aka pirates, to attack British ships. They were then
supposed to split the booty with the U.S.

British Navy:

1) 94 ships-of-the-line (1782), 104 frigates (1781), 37 sloops (1781),
and 171,000 sailors

2) Casualties: 1,243 killed in battle, 18,500 died of disease (1776-1780),
42,000 deserted

Continental Army:

1) Army and Militia: 40,000 (average), 200,000 (total served)

2) Allies: 63,000 French and Spanish (Gibraltar)

3) The Continental Army of 1775, comprising the initial New England Army,
organized by Washington into three divisions, six brigades, and 38 regiments.

4) The Continental Army of 1776, reorganized after the initial enlistment
period of the soldiers in the 1775 army had expired. Washington had submitted
recommendations to the Continental Congress almost immediately after he had
accepted the position of Commander-in-Chief, but the Congress took time to
consider and implement these. Despite attempts to broaden the recruiting
base beyond New England, the 1776 army remained skewed toward the Northeast
both in terms of its composition and of its geographical focus. This army
consisted of 36 regiments, most standardized to a single battalion of 768 men
strong and formed into eight companies, with a rank-and-file strength of 640.

5) The Continental Army of 1777-80 evolved out of several critical
reforms and political decisions that came about when it became apparent
that the British were sending massive forces to put an end to the American
Revolution. The Continental Congress passed the "Eighty-eight Battalion
Resolve", ordering each state to contribute one-battalion regiments in
proportion to their population, and Washington subsequently received
authority to raise an additional 16 battalions. Enlistment terms extended
to three years or to "the length of the war" to avoid the year-end crises
that depleted forces.

6) The Continental Army of 1781-82 saw the greatest crisis on the American
side in the war. Congress was bankrupt, making it very difficult to replenish
the soldiers whose three-year terms had expired. Popular support for the
war reached an all-time low, and Washington had to put down mutinies both
in the Pennsylvania Line and in the New Jersey Line. Congress voted to
cut funding for the Army, but Washington managed nevertheless to secure
important strategic victories.

7) The Continental Army of 1783-84 was succeeded by the United States
Army. As peace was restored with the British, most of the regiments were
disbanded in an orderly fashion, though several had already been diminished.

A small residual force remained at West Point and some frontier outposts until
Congress created the United States Army by their resolution of June 3, 1784.

8) By 1779, as many as one in seven Americans in Washington's army was
black: At first Washington was hesitant about enlisting blacks. But when
he heard they had fought well at Bunker Hill, he changed his mind. The
all-black First Rhode Island Regiment (composed of 33 freedmen and 92
slaves who were promised freedom if they served until the end of the war)
distinguished itself in the Battle of Newport. Later, they were all but
wiped out in a British attack.

British Army:

1) 48,000 (America peak), 121,000 (global 1781), 7,500 (Gibraltar)

2) Loyalists: 25,000 (total served)

3) Hanoverians: 2,365 (total served)

4) Germans: 29,875 (total served)

5) Native American Allies: 29,875 (total served)

Continental Army Departments:

1) Canadian Department: The establishment of the Canadian Department
reflected the aspirations of the Continental Congress and some Americans to
annex the British province of Quebec, then often referred to as "Canada",
but the effort was ultimately unsuccessful. Although the Americans captured
Montreal in November 1775, and established their headquarters at Château
Ramezay, the region was never entirely under the control of the Continental
Army. The Canadian Department was formally established from the New York
Department on January 17, 1776. After the Invasion of Canada failed, all
troops were withdrawn to Fort Ticonderoga, New York. The Canadian Department
was officially discontinued on July 8, 1776.

2) Eastern Department: The Eastern Department was formed around those states
that had originally sent troops to support the Siege of Boston, and in that
sense it even existed before the Continental Army. This was essentially
the New England department, and included the states of New Hampshire,
Massachusetts (including the present state of Maine), Rhode Island, and
Connecticut. For the first year of the war, the field army associated with
this department, under the command of General Washington, was variously
designated as the Continental Army, Grand Army, or Main Army. The Eastern
Department was formally established on April 4, 1776 when the Main Army
under Washington moved from Boston to New York City. Important operations
in this department included the Siege of Boston in 1775-1776 and the Battle
of Rhode Island in 1779. The department was discontinued in November 1779.

3) Northern Department: The predecessor of the Northern Department was the
New York Department, which was established on June 25, 1775. This department
was sometimes described as the Separate Department and the troops stationed
in it were known as the Separate Army. The original New York Department
was coextensive with the Province of New York. The department's boundaries
were extended to include Canada in the initial phase of the Invasion of
Canada, but Canada was established as a separate department on January 17,
1776. When the Middle Department was created on February 27, 1776 the New
York Department was merged into it.

The Middle Department, as originally organized, included all of the colonies
of New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, and Maryland. The inclusion
of New York in the Middle Department continued for less than two months,
however. In April 1776, the Main Army moved from Boston to New York City
and Washington assumed command of the Middle Department. The Northern
Department was formally established from the Middle Department on April 14,
1776. The reorganized Northern Department included only that portion of the
colony of New York north of the Hudson Highlands, and the present state
of Vermont. The field army associated with the Northern Department was
known as the Northern Army. Operations in this department did not end with
Saratoga. Fighting continued in the Northern Department until the end of the
war. The department was discontinued upon the death of its last commander,
General Alexander, at Albany on January 15, 1783.

4) Highlands Department: The Highlands Department was the smallest in
area. Strictly speaking, it was part of the Middle Department, but because
of its importance it was virtually a separate department. The Highlands
Department was formed around the defenses on the Hudson River about 50 miles
north of New York City, where the Appalachians and the Hudson intersect. After
the British occupied New York City in 1776 the defenses just north of there
became critically important. The presence of British naval forces at New
York emphasized the importance of the Hudson River, and both sides in the
war recognized the importance of controlling that waterway. The Americans
created fortifications, including West Point with its chain across the river.

Washington assigned Continental troops under General Heath to the Highlands
on November 12, 1776 and there was a Continental Army garrison in the
Highlands from then until the end of the war. Heath's assignment thus
created a de facto military department. The British sought to gain control
with the Saratoga campaign in 1777, and frequently raided into the southern
reaches of the department to interfere with the movement of military goods
and personnel. One of the most notable incidents in the history of this
department was the defection of Benedict Arnold in September 1780.

5) Middle Department: The Middle Department was established on February 27,
1776.[10] Originally it included all of the colonies of New York, New Jersey,
Pennsylvania, Delaware, and Maryland. In April 1776, the Main Army moved from
Boston to New York, and became the field army associated with the Middle
Department for the remainder of the war. On April 14, 1776 that portion of
New York north of the Hudson Highlands, and the present state of Vermont
were separated from the Middle Department and organized as the Northern
Department. The Middle Department then comprised the Hudson Highlands in
the state of New York, the rest of New York south of the Highlands, and
the states of New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, and Maryland.

The term Main Army had come into use during the Siege of Boston, because
the majority of Continental Army regiments were assigned to it. The term
was retained throughout the war. Most units in the Middle Department were
assigned to the Main Army, under George Washington, or to the Highlands
Department, which was under Washington's close supervision. A few regiments
and independent companies were assigned to the Middle Department from time to
time, but were not assigned to Washington's army or to the Highlands. These
units were simply said to have been assigned to the Middle Department.

Some of the Continental Army's most important campaigns were fought in this
department. These included the New York campaign and the New Jersey campaign
which ended with the battles of Trenton and Princeton. The Philadelphia
campaign was fought in this department, after which the Continental Army
went into winter quarters at Valley Forge. In 1778 this department was
the scene of the Monmouth campaign. After Monmouth, on June 28, 1778,
major military operations in the United States shifted to the Southern
Department. The department existed until the close of the war. It was the
scene of one of the war's last episodes when the British Army evacuated
New York City on November 25, 1783.

6) Western Department: The Western Department covered the frontier territories
west and northwest of Virginia and Pennsylvania, including the present
states of Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Michigan, and Wisconsin. It extended
from Pittsburgh all the way to the Illinois country and as far north as the
southern peninsula of Michigan. The department was established in 1777. Its
first commander was Edward Hand. George Rogers Clark's Illinois campaign
of 1779 was one of the most notable operations in this department. This
department was the only one to remain after the war. The last elements
of the Continental Army, stationed at Fort Pitt, were kept to guard the
western frontier outposts.

7) Southern Department: The Southern Department was formally established
on February 27, 1776. The department included Virginia, North Carolina,
South Carolina, and Georgia and the western frontiers of those colonies, from
which were created the present states of West Virginia, Kentucky, Tennessee,
Alabama, and Mississippi. The field army associated with this department was
known as the Southern Army. The Southern Department was the most independent
of the commands due to geography and the need for year-round operations.

Most of the territorial departments to the north of this department suspended
offensive operations for the winter and early spring. The Southern Department
was also the only one in which the troops assigned were destroyed twice. The
first time was at the surrender of Charleston on May 12, 1780. The second was
at the Battle of Camden on August 16, 1780. Despite these two catastrophic
defeats, however, this department was the location of the Siege of Yorktown,
in 1781, which effectively decided the outcome of the war. Important events
in the Southern Department after Yorktown were the evacuation of Savannah
and Charleston in July and December 1782. The Southern Department existed
until the close of the war.

Continental Casualties:

1) United States: 25,000-70,000 total dead, 6,800 killed in battle, 17,000
died of disease

2) France: at least 7,000 dead (2,112 in the United States)

3) Spain: 5,000 killed

4) Netherlands: 500 killed

 
British Casualties:

1) Army: 43,633 total dead, 9,372 killed in battle, 27,000 died of disease

2) Navy: 1,243 killed in battle, 18,500 died of disease (1776-1780),
42,000 deserted

3) Loyalists: 7,000 total dead, 1,700 killed in battle, 5,300 died of disease
(estimated)

4) Germans: 7,774 total dead, 1,800 killed in battle, 4,888 deserted

List of British "Acts"

    April 5, 1763 - Sugar Act
    September 1, 1763 - Currency Act
    April 5, 1764 - American Revenue Act
    March 22, 1765 - Stamp Act
    March 24, 1765 - Quartering Acts
    March 18, 1766 - Declaratory Act or American Colonies Act 1766
    June 29, 1767 - Townshend Revenue Act (Townshend Duties)
    May 10, 1773 - Tea Act
    March to June 1774 - Coercive Acts or Intolerable Acts

END

