A discussion of the change in calendar
(from the Internet)

BEGIN

Did you know that people living in 1752 lost 11 days?!  September 3 through
September 13, 1752 is missing from the calendar.

Actually, what happened is that Pope Gregory XIII in 1582 decreed that the
calendar be changed from the Julian to what we call the Gregorian calendar.
This was based in part on the work of an obscure Polish astronomer named
Nicolaus Copernicus (1473-1543).  The Gregorian calendar was not adopted
all at once everywhere.  England changed calendars in 1752.

The eleven days were removed from the calendar to get it back into sync with
various astrological events.  The average Julian year consists of 365.25
days, the average Gregorian year consists of 365.2425 days.  Under the
Julian calendar an extra day was inserted every fourth year which is a
little too much.  Under the Gregorian calendar an extra day is inserted
every fourth year with the exception of the turns of centuries (with the
further exception of every fourth century).

END



More calendar stuff
(from the Internet)

BEGIN

Birth Dates & Calendars

Beginning in 45 B.C., many parts of the world used the Julian calendar to
mark the passage of time.  According to the Julian calendar, March 25 was
the first day of the year and each year was 365 days 6 hours long.  In 1582,
Pope Gregory XIII determined that the Julian Calendar was incorrect:  each day
was just a little bit too long.  This meant that the human calendar wasn't
keeping up with nature's calendar, and the seasons kept arriving slightly
earlier in the year.  To solve the problem, Pope Gregory XIII created the
Gregorian calendar - the calendar that we use officially in the United States
- with the first day of the year set to January 1.  He also had everyone jump
ahead by 10 days to make up for the days lost by using the Julian calendar.

The practice of writing double dates resulted from this switch to the
Gregorian calendar, and also from the fact that not all countries accepted
the new calendar at the same time.  For example, England and the American
colonies didn't officially accept the new calendar until 1752.  Before 1752,
the English government still observed March 25 as the first of the year,
but most of the population observed January 1.  For this reason, many people
wrote dates falling between January 1 and March 25 with both years.

By the time England and the colonies adopted the new Gregorian calendar,
the discrepancy between the two calendars was eleven days, instead of ten.
To resolve the discrepancy, the government ordered that September 2, 1752,
be followed by September 14, 1752.  Some people also added 11 days to their
birth dates (a fact that is not noted on their birth certificates).

END



Even more calendar stuff
(from the Internet)

BEGIN

THE AMAZING 80% YEAR OF 1752

The modern calendar is a compilation of usages dating from the days of Julius
Caesar, when the Greek astronomer and mathematician Sosigenes devised for
Rome a calendar only essentially familiar to us as our present-day calendar.
It was during the late 16th century that work of the 6th century Anglo-Saxon
monk, Bede, was submitted to Pope Gregory XIII who accepted the calculations
and made the decision to issue a more accurate calendar which ultimately
was accepted. The Gregorian calendar was adopted by most Roman Catholic
countries. Many protestant countries did not accept the new calendar until
the 18th century, including Britain ... which meant America as well.

The British finally accepted the Gregorian calendar for itself and all its
possessions effective March 25, 1752.  But, a remarkable 2-step change was
made which is little realized today.  Read on ...

It is most important that the reader understand that the British used to
change the year number on March 25th and not January 1st as we do today.
On March 24, 1751 the next day would be March 25, 1752 advancing the year
as usual.  But, a somewhat confusing phenomenon occurred, and for present
day imaginations, comprehension requires close attention.

1.  First, it was decreed that 1752 should end with December 31st and not
be carried on to the next March 25th.

2.  Second, it was also decreed that the arrival of September 2, 1752 should
be called September 14, 1752.

For the sake of clarity we explain; the period of January 1 - March 24,
1751 was the end of an epoch.  The year of 1752 began on March 25th and
ended with December 31 1752, thus the earlier days of 1752 never existed,
as the deleted days of September 2-13 also never existed.  The year 1752
was a very short year; 72 days shorter, in fact.

Of course, dates may be recomputed from the old to the new calendars.
For instance, George Washington's birthday was February 11, 1731 as far as
his mother was concerned.  Today, we must reckon his birthday as February
22, 1732 in consideration of the new calendar.  To put it in perspective,
if we count backwards from today the actual number of days since G.W was
born, we would come up with February 22, 1732 using the present-day calendar.

To convert from the old Julian to the new Gregorian calendar, one must add
10 to 13 days to the old date, and sometimes change the year one extra when
the date considered falls within the period January 1 - March 24.  This is
crucially important to those interested in genealogy and historical research.
Documented dates before March 25, 1752 do not necessarily always corroborate
a stated period of time.  And, references to any New Year's Day before 1752,
in Great Britain, meant March 25th.

END



From "The World Almanac and Book of Facts 2004" ...

BEGIN

  The Julian calendar, under which all Western nations measured time until
AD 1582, was authorized by Julius Caesar in 46 BC.  It called for a year of
365 1/4 days, starting in January, with every fourth year being a leap year
or 366 days.  St. Bede the Venerable, an Anglo-Saxon monk, announced in AD
730 that the Julian year was 11 min. 14 sec too long, a cumulative error
of about a day every 128 years, but nothing was done about this for centuries.
  By 1582 the accumulated error was estimated at 10 days.  In that year
Pope Gregory XIII decreed that the day following Oct. 4, 1582, should be
called Oct. 15, thus dropping 10 days and initiating the Gregorian calendar.
  The Gregorian calendar continued a system devised by the monk Dionysuis
Exiguus (6th century), starting from the first year following the birth
of Jesus Christ, which was inaccurately taken to be year 753 in the Roman
calendar.  Leap years were continued but, to prevent further displacements,
centesimal years (years ending in 00) were made common years, not leap years,
unless divisible by 400.  Under this plan, 1600 and 200 are leap years
(as is 2004); 1700, 1800, and 1900 are not.
  The Gregorian calendar was adopted at once by France, Italy, Spain,
Portugal, and Luxembourg.  Within 2 years most German Catholic states,
Belgium, and parts of Switzerland and the Netherlands were brought under the
new calendar, and Hungary followed in 1587.  The rest of the Netherlands,
along with Denmark and the German Protestant states, made the change in
1699-1700.
  The British government adopted the Gregorian calendar and imposed it on
all its possessions, including the American colonies, in 1752, decreeing
that the day following Sept. 2, 1752, should be called Sept. 14, a loss of
11 days.  All dates preceding were marked OS, for Old Style.  In addition,
New Year's Day was moved to Jan. 1 from Mar. 25 (under the old reckoning,
for example, Mar. 24, 1700, had been followed by Mar. 25, 1701).  Thus George
Washington's birthdate, which was Feb. 11, 1731, OS, became Feb. 22, 1732,
NS (New Style).  In 1755 Sweden also went Gregorian.
  In 1793 the French revolutionary government adopted a calendar of 12
months of 30 days with 5 extra days in September of each common year and
a 6th every 4th year.  Napolean reinstated the Gregorian calendar in 1806.
  The Gregorian system later spread to non-European regions, replacing
traditional calendars at least for official purposes.  Japan in 1873, Egypt
in 1875, China in 1912, and Turkey in 1925 made the change, usually in
conjunction with political upheaval.  In China, the republican government
began reckoning years from its 1911 founding.  After 1949, the People's
Republic adopted the Common, or Christian Era, year count, even for the
traditional lunar calendar, which is also retained.  In 1918 the Soviet
Union decreed that the day after Jan. 31, 1918, OS, would be Feb. 14,
1918, NS.  Greece changed over in 1923.  For the first time in history,
all major nations had one calendar.  The Russian Orthodox church and some
other Christian sects retained the Julian calendar.
  To convert from the Julian to the Gregorian calendar, add 10 days to
dates, Oct. 5, 1582, through Feb. 28, 1700; after that date add 11 days
through Feb. 28, 1800; 12 days through Feb. 28, 1900; and 13 days through
Feb. 28, 2100.
  A century consists of 100 consecutive years.  The 1st century AD may
be said to have run from the years 1 through 100.  The 20th century by
this reckoning consisted of the years 1901 through 2000 and technically
ended Dec. 31, 2000, as did the 2nd millenium AD.  The 21st century thus
technically began Jan. 1, 2001.

END



A little more explanation concerning the calendar ...

BEGIN

From: hayesstw.spamless@yahoo.com (Steve Hayes)
Subject: Re: April first, calendars and software...
Date: Fri, 10 Oct 2003 05:40:03 GMT

On Thu, 09 Oct 2003 22:37:48 -0400, Denis Beauregard <no@spam.com> wrote:

>Is there some good explanation about the first day of the year
>in England and France depending on the time period ?
>
>I was at a genealogy course tonite and the teacher said something
>about that which is different of what I thought previously, so I
>would like to know the truth.  
>
>For example, I thought the year begun the March 1st in old England,
>until 1752 (ditto for USA).  I say that because genealogy softwares
>generating a double year does so for records in January and February
>until 1752.  But the teacher said that the beginning of the year, in 
>England, was changed from April 1st to January 1st in 1669.
>
>Or is it that FTM is wrong in generating double year in January
>and February only ?

Before 1752 the year in England began on 25 March, which was the feast
of the Annunciation in the Christian calendar. It was a logical starting
place, because it was the hypothetical date on which Jesus was conceived,
and then born 9 months later on 25 December. Whether it was the actual date
or not is a moot point, but that is not really relevant to your question.

In 1752 the beginning of the year was changed to 1 January (which came into
effect on 1 Jan 1753), and Great Britain switched to the Gregorian Calendar
for most purposes, so they dropped 11 days from the calendar.

One purpose for which it did not switch was the fiscal year, because
accountants are like that. They don't like changing the length of the
financial year because it messes up their figures. So the financial year
continued to begin on 25 March, Julian, which was 6 April, Gregorian,
at least in 1753.

That is why Brits still have to do their income tax on 6 April.

Such was the conservatism of the accountancts that when the gap between
Julian and Gregorian stretched to 12 days in 1800, they did not move to
7 April, and when it stretched to 13 days in 190 they did not change the
beginning of the fiscal year to 8 April. It did not change in 2000 because
2000 is divisible by 400, so the gap is still 13 days.

So the Brit tax inspectors are at least 200 years behing the times.

Steve Hayes
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/7734/stevesig.htm

  Gregorian Calendar

How do we keep track of time? When do we plant our crops, how do we know when
to observe religious holidays? Societies need some way to keep track of time,
and complex calendars (the word comes from the Roman term for the beginning of
the month) were developed early in human history.  In agricultural societies
the seasonal cycle of the Sun is crucial, but for shorter periods the lunar
cycle suggests itself as well.  Historically the problem was that the year
does not contain a whole number of days or months. The mean interval between
successive vernal equinoxes (365.2424 days), is about 11 minutes less than
365 1/4 days; the synodic period of the Moon (the time between successive
full moons or new moons) is about 29 1/2 days, and thus 12 months add up to
about 354 days. Constructing a calendar that incorporates both the movements
of the Sun and Moon is therefore not a simple business. Various solutions
have been tried.

The Egyptian calendar was perhaps the simplest solution. The year was made
up of twelve months of thirty days each, and five days were added at the
end. Since this meant an error of about 1/4 day per year, the starting date
of the year slowly drifted forward with respect to the seasons until after
1460 years it had returned to where it started. The rising of the Nile,
the crucial event in the Egyptian agricultural cycle, was predicted by the
heliacal rising of Sirius,[1] <#fn0> the brightest star in the heavens. No
attention was paid to the Moon.

Most cultures in the ancient Near East relied on a calendar in which months
had alternating lengths of 29 and 30 days and added a month about every
third year. Thus, in ancient Israel the elders added an extra month of
29 days every third year after the sixth month (Adar). But these 29 days
would not make up entirely for the entire deficit of 3 x 11 1/4 days, and
therefore in some years two extra months had to be added. In the Greek city
states months were added haphazardly as needed and no consistent system of
intercalation was ever developed.

The most sophisticated system of keeping the motions of both the Sun and Moon
harnessed in a single calendar was developed in Mesopotamia. By the Persian
period, ca. 500, the system incorporated the so-called Metonic cycle (we name
it after the Greek Meton, ca. 425 BCE) in which the following relationship
is used: 19 solar years contain 6939 3/4 days; 110 months of 29 days plus 125
months of 30 days add up to 6940 days. 19 years, then, contained 235 months,
and starting in (on our calendar) 499 BC, the calendar in that part of the
world was regulated on a cycle of intercalating 7 extra months in 19 years,
as shown in the following scheme (in which a dash indicates a year of 12
months and a VI or XII indicated a year in which a month was added after
the sixth or twelfth month):**

*- - XII - - XII - XII - - XII - - XII - - VI - XII*

After a few irregularities, starting in 384 BCE, this scheme was rigorously
adhered to, through the Greek and Roman conquests, until 75 CE, when
cuneiform texts ceased.

For convenience, the month was usually subdivided into smaller time
periods. The Greeks divided the month into three periods of ten days,
but a division of seven days was older and more common in the Near East.
We find the seven-day week already in /Genesis/. The names that we assign
to the days have their origin in the division of the day into 24 hours,
which originated in Egypt. In the Hellenistic period (300 BCE - 100 BCE)
it became common to assign a ruling planet (including the Sun and Moon)
to each hour of the day. The common order of the wandering heavenly bodies
was Saturn-Jupiter-Mars-Sun-Venus-Mercury-Moon. The first hour of the first
day was assigned to the Sun, the second to Venus, the third to Mercury,
etc., repeating the cycle in the order given above. The 24th hour was thus
assigned to Mercury and the first hour of the second day to the Moon. Naming
the days after the planets that rule their first hours, we thus arrive at the
sequence Sun's day-Moon's day-Mars's day-Mercury's day-Jupiter's day-Venus's
day-Saturn's day.[2] <#fn1> The modern English variations on these names
are due to substituting Nordic or Saxon gods for some of the Roman names:
Tiw for Mars, Wotan for Mercury, Thor for Jupiter, Frigg for Venus.

Our civil method for reckoning time, then has a mixed origin. Our division
of the hour into minutes and seconds is derived from the sexagesimal system
of the Mesopotamians; the division of the day into 24 hours originated with
the Egyptians; the seven-day week originated in the ancient Near East,
while the names are derived from a Greek convention developed during the
Hellenistic period. Our calendar is based on the motion of the Sun alone,
but our various religious calendars are based on a combination of the motions
of the Sun and Moon.  Our civil calendar derives from the Romans with some
alterations. Its origin is described nicely in the "Calendar" article in
the 11th edition of the /Encyclopedia Britannica/ (1910), which reads in part:

    The civil calendar of all European [and American] countries has been
    borrowed from that of the Romans. Romulus[3] <#fn2> is said to have
    divided the year into ten months only, including in all 304 days, and
    it is not very well known how the remaining days were disposed of. The
    ancient Roman year commenced with March, as is indicated by the names
    September, October, November, December, which the last four months
    still retain. July and August, likewise, were anciently denominated
    Quintillis and Sextillis, their present appellations having been bestowed
    in compliment to Julius Caesar and Augustus. In the reign of Numa[4]
    <#fn3> two months were added to the year, January at the beginning and
    February at the end; and this arrangement continued till the year 452
    BC., when the Decemvirs[5] <#fn4> changed the order of the months, and
    placed February after January. The months now consisted of twenty-nine
    and thirty days alternately, to correspond with the synodic revolution of
    the moon [full moon to full moon], so that the year contained 354 days;
    but a day was added to make the number odd, which was considered more
    fortunate, and the year therefore consisted of 355 days. This differed
    from the solar year by ten whole days and a fraction; but to restore
    the coincidence, Numa ordered an additional or intercalary month to
    be inserted every second year between the 23d and 24th of February,
    consisting of twenty-two and twenty-three days alternately, so that
    four years constituted 1465 days, and the mean length of the year was
    consequently 366 1/4 days. The additional month was called /Mercedinus/ or
    /Mercedonius/, from /merces/, wages, probably because the wages of workmen
    and domestics were usually paid at this season of the year. According to
    the above arrangement, the year was too long by one day, which rendered
    another correction necessary. As the error amounted to twenty-four days
    in as many years, it was ordered that every third period of eight years,
    instead of containing four intercalary months, amounting in all to ninety
    days, should contain only three of those months, consisting of twenty-two
    days each. The mean length of the year was thus reduced to 365 1/4 days;
    but it is not certain at what time the octennial periods, borrowed from
    the Greeks, were introduced into the Roman calendar, or whether they
    were at any time strictly followed. It does not even appear that the
    length of the intercalary month was regulated by any certain principle,
    for a discretionary power was left with the pontiffs,[6] <#fn5> to whom
    the care of the calendar was committed, to intercalate more or fewer
    days according as the year was found to differ more or less from the
    celestial motions. This power was quickly abused to serve political
    objects, and the calendar consequently thrown into confusion. By giving
    a greater of less number of days to the intercalary month, the pontiffs
    were enabled to prolong the term of a magistracy or hasten the annual
    elections; and so little care had been taken to regulate the year,
    that, at the time of Julius Caesar, the civil equinox differed from the
    astronomical by three months, so that the winter months were carried
    back into autumn and the autumnal into summer.

    In order to put an end to the disorders arising from the negligence or
    ignorance of the pontiffs, [Julius] Caesar abolished the use of the
    lunar year and the intercalary month, and regulated the civil year
    entirely by the sun. With the advice and assistance of Sosigenes,[7]
    <#fn6> he fixed the mean length of the year at 365 1/4 days, and
    decreed that every fourth year should have 366 days, the other years
    having each 365. In order to restore the vernal equinox to the 25th
    of March, the place it occupied in the time of Numa, he ordered two
    extraordinary months to be inserted between November and December in
    the current year, the first to consist of thirty three, and the second
    of thirty-four days. The intercalary month of twenty-three days fell
    into the year of course, so that the ancient year of 355 days received
    an augmentation of ninety days; and the year on that occasion contained
    in all 445 days. This was called the last year of confusion. The first
    Julian year commenced with the 1st of January of the 46th before the
    birth of Christ, and the 708th from the foundation of the city.

    In the distribution of the days through the several months, Caesar
    adopted a simpler and more commodious arrangement than that which
    has since prevailed. He had ordered that the first, third, fifth,
    seventh, ninth, and eleventh months, that is January, March, May,
    July, September and November, should have each thirty-one days, and
    the other months thirty, excepting February, which in common years
    should have only twenty-nine day, but every fourth year thirty days.
    This order was interrupted to gratify the vanity of Augustus, by giving
    the month bearing his name as many days as July, which was named after
    the first Caesar. A day was accordingly taken from February and given
    to August; and in order that three months of thirty-one days might
    not come together, September and November were reduced to thirty days,
    and thirty-one given to October and December. For so frivolous a reason
    was the regulation of Caesar abandoned, and a capricious arrangement
    introduced, which it requires some attention to remember. [8]

    The additional day which occurred every fourth year was given to February,
    as being the shortest month, and was inserted in the calendar between
    the 24th and 25th day. February having then twenty-nine days, the 25th
    was the 6th of the calends of March, /sexto calendas/; the preceding,
    which was the additional or intercalary day, was called /bis-sexto
    calendas/,--hence the term /bissextile/, which is still employed to
    distinguish the year of 366 days. The English denomination of /leap
    year/ would have been more appropriate if that year had differed from
    common years in /defect/, and contained only 364 days. In the modern
    calendar the intercalary day is still added to February, not, however,
    between the 24th and 25th, but as the 29th.

    . . .

    Although the Julian method of intercalation is perhaps the most
    convenient that could be adopted, yet, as it supposes the year too long
    by 11 minutes 14 seconds, it could not without correction very long
    answer the purpose for which it was devised, namely, that of preserving
    always the same interval of time between the commencement of the year
    and the equinox. Sosigenes could scarcely fail to know that this year
    was too long; for it had been shown long before, by the observations
    of Hipparchus [ca. 125 BCE], that the excess of 3651/4 days above a
    true solar year would amount to a day in 300 years. The real error is
    indeed more than double of this, and amounts to a day in 128 years;
    but in the time of Caesar the length of the year was an astronomical
    element not very well determined. In the course of a few centuries,
    however, the equinox sensibly retrograded towards the beginning of the
    year. When the Julian calendar was introduced, the equinox fell on the
    25th of March. At the time of the Council of Nicea, which was held in
    325, it fell on the 21st . . . .

The Julian Calendar was naturally adopted by the successor of the Roman
Empire, Christian Europe with the Papacy at its head. By about 700 CE it
had become customary to count years from the starting point of the birth
of Christ (later corrected by *Johannes Kepler* <../People/kepler.html>
to 4 BCE). But the equinox kept slipping backwards on the calendar one
full day every 130 years. By 1500 the vernal equinox fell on the 10th or
11th of March and the autumnal equinox on the 13th or 14th of September,
and the situation was increasingly seen as a scandal. The most important
feast day on the Christian calendar is Easter, when the suffering, death,
and resurrection of Christ are celebrated. In the New Testament we find
that Christ's crucifixion occurred in the week of Passover. On the Jewish
calendar, Passover was celebrated at the full moon of the first month
(Nissan) of spring. In developing their own calendar (4th century CE),
Christians put Easter on the first Sunday after the first full moon after
the spring equinox. If the equinox was wrong, then Easter was celebrated
on the wrong day. Most other Christian observances (e.g., the beginning of
Lent, Pentecost) are reckoned backward or forward from the date of Easter. An
error in the equinox thus introduced numerous errors in the entire religious
calendar. Something had to be done. After the unification of the Papacy in
Rome, in the fifteenth century, Popes began to consider calendar reform. After
several false starts, a commission under the leadership of the Jesuit
mathematician and astronomer *Christoph Clavius <../People/clavius.html>*
(1537-1612) succeeded. Several technical changes were instituted having to
do with the calculation of Easter, but the main change was simple. In 1582
Pope Gregory XIII (hence the name Gregorian Calendar) ordered ten days to
be dropped from October, thus restoring the vernalequinox at least to an
average of the 20th of March, close to what it had been at the time of
the Council of Nicea. In order to correct for the loss of one day every
130 years, the new calendar dropped three leap years every 400 years.
Henceforth century years were leap years only if divisible by 400. 1600
and 2000 are leap years; 1700, 1800 and 1900 are not.

The new calendar, although controversial among technical astronomers,
was promulgated from Rome and adopted immediately in Catholic countries.
Protestant countries followed suit more slowly. Protestant regions
in Germany, and the northern Netherlands adopted the calendar within
decades. The English, always suspicious of Rome during this period, retained
the Julian Calendar. Further, while others now began the new year uniformly
on 1 January, the English began it on 25 March (an older custom). Now, for
example, the date 11 February 1672 in England was 21 February 1673 on the
Continent. After 1700 in which the Julian Calendar had a leap year but the
Gregorian did not, the difference was eleven days. The English and their
American colonies finally adopted the Gregorian Calendar in the middle of
the eighteenth century. George Washington was born on 11 February on the
Julian Calendar; we celebrate his birthday on 22 February.

Note, finally, that the Gregorian Calendar is useless for astronomy because
it has a ten-day hiatus in it. For the purpose of calculating positions
backward in time, astronomers use the Julian Date.

**

------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Notes*
[1]The time of year when Sirius comes out of the rays of the Sun and is
first visible on the eastern horizon at sunrise.
[2]See Otto Neugebauer, /The Exact Science in Antiquity/, 2d ed.  (Providence:
Brown University Press, 1957), pp. 82-86.
[3]Legendary founder and first king of Rome, ca. 750 BC.
[4]Numa Pompilius, second legendary king of Rome, ca. 700 BC.
[5]/Decemviri/: any college of ten magistrates in ancient Rome. The most
famous college was the /decemviri legibus scribendis/, or the "composers of
the Twelve Tables," who ruled Rome absolutely for a few years around 450 BC.
[6]Roman high priests.
[7]A Greek astronomer and mathematician who flourished in the first century
BC None of his writings have survived and we know about him only through the
writings of Pliny (d. 79 AD). Pliny tells us that Sosigenes was consulted
by Julius Caesar about the calendar /(Natural Histories/, xviii, 25).
[8]Thirty days has September, April, June, and November . . .

*Citation*/
Gregorian Reform of the Calendar: Proceedings of the Vatican Conference
to Commemorate its 400th Anniversary, 1582-1992/, ed. G. V. Coyne, M. A.
Hoskin, and O. Pedersen (Vatican City: Pontifical Academy of Sciences,
Specolo Vaticano, 1983). Jean Meeus and Denis Savoie, "The history of the
tropical year," /Journal of the British Astronomical Association/, 102 #1
(1992): 40-42

------------------------------------------------------------------------
ICONBAR (Graphic Browsers)
<http://es.rice.edu/cgi-bin/imagemap/ES/humsoc/Galileo/Imap/iconbar.map>
TEXT NAVIGATOR (Text Browsers) <../galileo_textnav.html>
galileo@rice.edu <../HtmlTools/mailform.html>

          Copyright ©1995 Albert Van Helden <../HtmlTools/cpnotice.html>

END



Newsgroups: alt.genealogy
Subject: Re: Accurate old dates?
Date: Mon, 15 Sep 2003 11:19:25 -0400

BEGIN

The story is complicated and the dates vary but In 1582 Pope Gregory XIII
(hence the name Gregorian Calendar) ordered ten days to be dropped from
October, thus restoring the vernalequinox at least to an average of the
20th of March.

This was slowly implemented over subsequent decades and the English and
their colonies finally adopted it in 1752 being pretty much the last holdouts.

http://es.rice.edu/ES/humsoc/Galileo/Things/gregorian_calendar.html
Is a pretty good account of the story going way back :)

BTW Tuesday was after the Norse god Tiw.

    Title: Introduction and Adoption of the Gregorian Calendar in Europe
    Author: Robert Wilde
    Date: 2001

European History
The Gregorian Calendar

Despite territorial, political and linguistic differences, Europe uses
the same calendar. Wherever you are in the continent, the rest is either
just entering, just leaving, or in the middle of, the same date. This
dating system, used by Europe and the rest of the 'westernized' world, was
introduced in 1582; it is the Gregorian Calendar. However, this uniformity
is a modern luxury, and for most of the early modern and modern period
Europe operated under several calendars which were weeks, and in the case
of Ottoman territories years, apart. This is an account of the introduction,
and adoption, of the Gregorian Calendar.

Until 1582 Europe operated in the Julian Calendar, a system of dating which
used a year of 365 days, with a 366th every four years. Unfortunately,
the Julian calendar had a minor error: the average Julian year was 365
days and 6 hours (the extra quarter being added in the leap years), while
the actual solar year is 365 days, 5 hours, 48 minutes and 46 seconds, a
difference of just over eleven minutes. (Please note: there is some debate
among astronomers and other parties as to what actually constitutes the
solar year, and these figures can vary by several seconds.) As a result,
for every Julian year that passed the human calendar became increasingly
out of synch with the natural solar cycle.

Considered alongside a human lifespan, eleven minutes a year is almost
irrelevant as it takes over a 130 years to gain a whole day. However, by 1582
the Julian calendar had been in use for well over a millennia and a half, and
Europe had become 12 days removed from the natural cycle. Seasons appeared
earlier in the year, and the informal agricultural calendar - the time for
ploughing, sowing and harvesting - was drifting apart from the original
traditions. Twelve days may still seem small, especially given the varying
onset of our seasons, but it was of great concern for the Catholic Church,
whose calendar of festivals was being distorted. The date of Easter was
heavily disputed throughout early Christian history, but the Church Council of
Nicea attempted to standardize it in 325 AD. Adopting a compromise between the
various divisions, Easter was to celebrated on the Sunday after the vernal
(spring) Equinox, which in 325 AD was March 21st. However, because of the
Julian calendar, the vernal equinox was occurring earlier and earlier in
the calendar year, and March 21st was slowly shifting into summer.

After a long tradition of concern for Easter's changing season, the process
that led to the Gregorian calendar began during the office of Pope Paul III
(1534 - 49), when he began to consult with astronomers to find an answer. He
also initiated the Council of Trent (1545 - 63) which discussed matters
relating to the whole Christian faith. This Council, in conjunction with
Pope Pius V (1559 - 65), introduced changes to the lunar calendar and
leap year system via a new Breviary and Missal. Consequently, when Pope
Gregory XIII was elected in 1572, the problem was still as great as ever,
but people were suggesting solutions already grounded in years of thought.

Gregory established a commission to investigate, which was led by Christopher
Clavius, one of the astronomers approached by Pope Paul III over twenty
years earlier. Clavius built on the work of another astronomer, Luigi Lilio,
and in 1582 Gregory issued a Papal Bull entitled Inter Gravissimas. This
introduced the 'Calendar', which incorporated reforms to the old Julian system
and made an immediate change to the existing date. Known as the 'New Style'
(with the Julian referred to as the 'Old Style'), this calendar would later
take the Pope's name - hence 'Gregorian'.

A Latin transcription of the Inter Gravissimas can be found here, along
with French and English translations. The reforms were:

- Leap years were to occur every four years (a continuation of the existing
custom), unless it was a centennial year. These were no longer automatically
leap years; instead, centennial years followed the same pattern as normal
years: every fourth centennial year was a leap year.

Put simply, Gregory decreed that while 1600 was to remain a leap year,
1700, 1800 and 1900 would not have any extra days, but following these three
2000 would again be a leap year, and so on. These five dates, including our
very recent 2000, were explicitly stated in the Inter Gravissimas. (Note:
The Julian calendar merely had a leap year every four years. It was sheer
coincidence that, once the Roman numerals were changed into numbers, the
years were, and remained, divisible by four.)

- The extra leap day was moved from within February itself to February 29th.

- 10 days were dropped from the existing date: October 4th 1582 was followed
by October 15, 1582.

- The rules for the positioning of Easter were changed.

- Contrary to many reports, the Bull made no mention of, or change to,
the date of New Years day.

Pope Gregory had intended to stabilize a changing calendar by reforming the
frequency of leap years. These changes were not perfect, because the Gregorian
Calendar remained slightly out of sync with the Solar year. However, the
difference is less than thirty seconds and, depending on which calculation
of the solar year you use, will only gain an extra day roughly every 3000
or 10,000 years. Equally, Gregory's omission of ten days - instead of the
twelve that had been lost under the Julian calendar - restored the vernal
equinox to the 21st March; the date set by the Nicene Council. However,
under this system the equinox varies between the 19th and the 22nd; this
result was probably a compromise by Gregory and the astronomers.

Gregory's Inter Gravissimas commanded all Christians to abolish the old
methods and adopt his new provisions. The Bull also allowed for some
difficulties, ordering distant areas to change in whichever year the news
reached them. However, the European switch from Old Style to New Style was
complicated by much more than geographic extent.

The Pope is head of the Catholic Church, and has no authority over
Protestants; indeed, in the 16th century many were actively opposed to
'Popery'. Of the countries that immediately adopted Gregory's reforms all were
officially Catholic. Italy, Poland and Portugal followed the Bull precisely,
moving straight from the 4th to the 15th of October, while France, Belgium,
Luxembourg and parts of the Netherlands and Switzerland converted later
in the year. By 1585 many of the Catholic regions in Germany, Austria and
the Czech/Slovak territories had also adopted the Gregorian calendar;
Hungary followed in 1587. Conversely, the Protestant nations kept the
Julian calendar, causing a division that lasted for over a century, while
the Eastern Orthodox Church also rejected the New Style.

Aside from Prussia, which moved from the 22nd August to the 2nd September
in 1610, the next round of changes occurred during 1700/01, when Denmark
(which then included Norway) and the remainder of Germany, Switzerland
and the Netherlands became Gregorian. (One Swiss canton, St. Gallen,
held out until 1724). However, these Protestant states continued to
reject Gregory's rules for the determination of Easter until 1776. The
next nation to convert was Britain in 1752, at which point another full
Julian cycle had elapsed requiring the omission of an extra eleventh day:
the 2nd September was followed by the 14th. This date also saw the calendar
adopted throughout the British Empire: the lands later known as the USA
had now become Gregorian. Sweden changed a year later, in 1753.

At this point in history the Gregorian Calendar was still a Christian device,
prompted by, and designed around, religious festivals. While western Europe
was predominantly Christian, and now Gregorian, large parts of central and
eastern Europe were under Muslim rule. Consequently, these countries had no
intention, or over-riding religious need, to change. Although the Gregorian
calendar slowly spread across the world during the 18th and 19th centuries,
the situation in Europe remained static until 1912.

As the Ottoman Empire slowly collapsed several countries followed their
independence with a switch to the Gregorian calendar, including Albania in
1912. However, the process that finally united the calendars of Europe was
ignited by the 1st World War. Some countries were forced into accepting
the reforms by an occupying army - these included Latvia and Lithuania -
while others, notably Russia, switched in the aftermath of a revolution. The
post-war division of the Ottoman Empire led to many of the Baltic countries
adopting the Gregorian calendar, and Turkey itself followed at the end
of 1926. Additionally, while the Eastern Orthodox Church has never fully
accepted the calendar, it did introduce several changes during 1923 that
brought them closer together.

These were the years when each country officially adopted the Gregorian
Calendar; in practice, many people within each state continued to use the
Old Style for long after this. Some Protestants remained opposed to the
reforms, but large numbers of people simply preferred the Julian method,
which was too long-standing and ingrained for them to change. Unfortunately,
there is no definitive list of the dates when each country changed. Although
many of the adoptions are well recorded, such as those of France and Italy,
the situation in some countries is more confused. In theory, a trawl through
each nation's legislation would reveal the results, but the changing geography
and political identities within Europe makes this a large task. Consequently,
online charts and lists will normally give several possible dates for
several countries, which include Bulgaria and Scotland.

The Gregorian reforms of 1582 were never intended to unify the calendars
of Europe, just those of the Christian nations. Indeed, the changes listed
in Gregory's Bull may seem very slight, comprising of an alteration which
only affected one year in a hundred, the loss of ten days and other minor
clarifications. However, the Inter Gravissimas began a chain of events
that are still ongoing in the world, over four hundred years later, and
the Gregorian Calendar has ceased to be a primarily Christian institution.

URL: http://www.tondering.dk/claus/calendar.html

END



Concerning the "double dates" (two years) used on documents prior to 1752 ...

BEGIN

From: Joseph Klett <Joseph.Klett@sos.state.nj.us>
Date: Nov 29, 2006

Without seeing the document, I (personally) would not assume that it is
even 1687/88.  Eights are often mistaken in colonial scripts because of
how they had to be scribed; however, usually it's a case where an eight is
misread as another number, not vice versa.

Since John describes this as "8/7" and not the reverse, this rendering
would be an anomaly for 1688/87--though still plausible since, as Mr.
Siskin points out, the year might have been written first as 1688 (based
on popular practice) and then "/7" added to clarify the legal date.

It is important to retain these references in dates in historical
transcriptions, and whenever practical in historical writing, because when
the first or second year is dropped (as in Mr. Siskin's statement that
"The date is March 17, 1688"), another researcher could interpret it as
meaning 1688/89 since the legal date March 17, 1688 would mean 1688/89
based on our present use of the calendar. And then the year can shift by
one in historical writings, as I have seen happen.

In journals and record books where documents were entered/dated
chronologically, you will see, say, February/March 1687 followed by April
1688. Often in loose documents, however, there is no corroboration of the
year and so, if only one year is written for dates in Jan-Mar (in English
documents prior to 1752), it should usually be assumed that the reference
is to the last months of the (previous) legal year, not the first months
of the (new) calendar year as we know it.

This is obviously important for archivists, genealogists and historian
to understand as it has direct bearing on establishing the chronology
of events, etc. I won't name names, but two humorous, though initially
perplexing examples, come to mind. Both cases involved references made by
persons charged with interpreting historical documents, but unfamiliar with
or mislead by "double-dating" and the old, English legal calendar.  In one
case, a caption fabricated a story relating to how the parties involved in
a major land transaction anticipated, many months prior, that an agreement
would be reached on a certain date in the future (the document was dated
in Jan-Mar and the agreement referenced had occurred in the previous,
though seemingly upcoming, fall). In the other case, a genealogy of German
families (done by an American) added double-years for dates from the 16th-
and 17th centuries based on the fact that English did this till 1752.

It's also important to remember, too, that in Quaker documents, the references
to 1st through 12th Mo. instead of the months' names are tied to what was
considered the legal year at the time--to which Quakers generally adhered
religiously in their records.  So before 1753, I believe, "2nd Mo." means
April, while after that it means February.

Joe Klett
NJ State Archives

END



from NGS Monthly
Feb 2020

BEGIN

The Creation of Leap Year and Its Effects on Genealogy
Aaron Goodwin

This Saturday is February 29th, a relatively uncommon occurrence as days
go. It's a leap day in a leap year. Unless you're like Dinah Shore, Tony
Robbins, or Ja Rule, all of whom share a birthday that day, you may not
even notice. For the rest of us, it's a subtle reminder that calendars
change. For genealogists in particular, it reminds us that subtle changes
in calendars require our attention in researching key times and places.

Our calendar, and the most commonly used calendar in the world, is the
Gregorian calendar, named after Pope Gregory XIII who commissioned it in
1582. In order to best understand the Gregorian calendar and its significance,
however, we need to first understand its predecessor, the Julian calendar,
and its accomplishments.

Among the world's earliest calendars, many were lunar, which determined
the length of year by tracking the position of the Moon. Lunar calendars
differed from solar calendars, which determined the length of a year by
tracking the position of the Earth relative to the Sun. The difference
between a lunar year measured by Moon phases and a solar year measured by
Earth's orbit around the Sun is about 11 minutes.

Later calendars attempted to account for the 11-minute difference and its
accumulated effects by periodically adjusting themselves to synchronize the
two measurements. In these cases, the occasional months added are referred
to as intercalary or interstitial months. The calendars that employed these
methods are referred to as lunisolar.

Prior to the reign of Julius Caesar, the Roman calendar was lunisolar,
but was also complicated at best. Early Roman calendars consisted of ten
months with a vaguely defined winter period. Over time, this winter period
was replaced by the two additional months of January and February. The
calendar, however, was still problematic as it had become completely
unconnected to the solar year. One solution was to develop a thirteenth,
intercalary month of 23 days called Mercedonius, which was inserted within
the month of February. That solution, however, was politicized as Roman
consuls determined when and for how long to hold Mercedonius, adjusting
the calendar to fit their political needs.

To standardize the Roman calendar, Julius Caesar turned to the Egyptian
calendar, which consisted of 365 days. To keep the calendar attached
to the Sun (a solar year is 365.2421 days), Egyptian astronomers
inserted an intercalary month from time to time. Ceasar and the Egyptian
philosopher Sosigenes of Alexandria combined forces to adapt the calendar
slightly. Instead of depending on astronomers to determine when an intercalary
month should be inserted, they simply added one day every fourth year,
which was added to the end of February. With these parameters the Julian
calendar was introduced by edict and began 1 January 45 BCE.

For all its improvements, the Julian calendar was still slightly longer
than the solar year. Over the centuries the slight inaccuracy compounded
until the calendar was ten days behind by the beginning of the 16th
century. Pope Gregory XIII sought to improve the accuracy by making two
key adjustments. First, he updated the calendar by removing ten days from
October 1582. Second, he determined that leap years (generally every four
years) should not be counted in centennial years that are not divisible by
four. So the years 1700, 1800, and 1900 were not leap years, but 2000 was.

As with the Julian calendar, the Gregorian calendar was adopted over
time by most of the Western world. But the adoption wasn't automatic or
universal. Protestant German states, for example, didn't adopt it until 1700,
nor did Great Britain until 1752.

A key feature of the Gregorian calendar was that the year began on 1 January,
just as the original Julian calendar had. While most of Europe and its
colonies elsewhere adopted the calendar, the start of the year varied by
location and period. In England, the new year was either 25 March or 25
December until shortly after the Norman Conquest in 1066. Between 1087 and
1155, it was 1 January. Then from 1155 until 1752, England's year began
25 March. Finally, from 1752 until the present, the Gregorian calendar
was adopted, and New Year's Day was once again January 1st. Each European
country has a different history for its New Year's Day.

Genealogists researching in England, its territories, or former territories
don't need special knowledge of calendrical history if they're researching
after 1752. But researchers of colonial America, for example, do need to
be aware of some of these details. English colonies in the Americas used
25 March as the beginning of the calendar year until 1752. That means that
dates written on documents need to be considered and recorded thoughtfully.

A twin born in colonial America late on the evening of 24 March 1741 may be
followed just a few minutes later by the birth of a sibling in the early
morning hours of 25 March 1742. Unless one is familiar with the Gregorian
calendar and its adoption by the British, one might think they were born a
year apart. When we record these two births, we clarify the situation by
adding a bracketed slash and the Gregorian year (e.g. 24 March 1741[/2]
and 25 March 1742). The brackets signal to the reader the fact that the
researcher has added the clarification based on her knowledge of the calendar
in use in the time and place she's researching.

If you're researching people of the English colonies, the details given here
should suffice in preparing you to understand dates as they're written. But
if you're researching Spanish, French, or Dutch colonies, for instance,
you'll need to conduct additional research to understand when the Gregorian
calendar was adopted locally and how dates were recorded.

For more details about the Julian and Gregorian calendars, New Year's Days,
and other world calendars, see, for example, "General Chronology," New Advent
(http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/03738a.htm : accessed 27 February 2020),
especially the sections titled "Beginning of the Year," "The Gregorian
Reform," and "Julian Period." For more details about Leap Day, see,
for example, Stephen Wood, "5 Things You May Not Know About Leap Day,"
History (https://www.history.com/news/why-do-we-have-leap-year : accessed
26 February 2020).

END



from https://www.newadvent.org/cathen/03738a.htm

BEGIN

General Chronology

    CHRISTIAN ERA
    PRE-CHRISTIAN CHRONOLOGY
    REGNAL YEARS
    INDICTIONS
    BEGINNING OF THE YEAR
    THE GREGORIAN REFORM
    JULIAN PERIOD
    OTHER ERAS
    DAYS OF THE MONTH AND WEEK
    THE CENTURY 

Chronology (Greek chronos time, logos, discourse), the science of
time-measurement, has two branches:

    Mathematical Chronology, which determines the units to be employed in
    measuring time, and
    Historical Chronology, of which we here treat, and which fixes in the
    general course of time the position of any particular occurrence, or,
    as it is generally termed, its date.

It is thus for history what latitude and longitude are for geography. The
first requisite in any system of historical chronology is an era, that
is to say a fixed point of time, the distance from which shall indicate
the position of all others. The term era, the derivation of which is not
certainly known, appears first to have been employed in France and Spain to
signify a number or rule. Since the need of a definite system of chronology
was first recognized by mankind, many and various eras have been employed at
different periods and by different nations. For practical purposes it is most
important to understand those which affect Christian history.

Christian era

Foremost among these is that which is now adopted by all civilized peoples
and known as the Christian, Vulgar, or Common Era, in the twentieth
century of which we are now living. This was introduced about the year
527 by Dionysius Exiguus, a Scythian monk resident at Rome, who fixed its
starting point in the year 753 from the foundation of Rome, in which year,
according to his calculation, the birth of Christ occurred. Making this the
year 1 of his era, he counted the years which followed in regular course
from it, calling them years "of the Lord", and we now designate such a date
A.D. (i.e. Anno Domini). The year preceding A.D. 1 is called Ante Christum
(A.C.) or Before Christ (B.C.). It is to be noted that there is no year 0
intervening, as some have imagined, between B.C. and A.D. It is supposed
by many that the calculation of Dionysius was incorrect, and that the birth
of Christ really occurred three years earlier than he placed it, or in the
year of Rome 750 which he styles 3 B.C. This, however, is immaterial for the
purposes of chronology, the first year of the Christian Era being that fixed,
rightly or wrongly, by Dionysius. His system was adopted but gradually,
first in Italy, then in other parts of Christendom. England would appear
to have been among the earliest regions to have made use of it, under the
influence of the Roman missioners, as it is found in Saxon charters of the
seventh century. In Gaul it made its appearance only in the eighth, and its
use did not become general in Europe until after A.D. 1000; accordingly in
French the term millésime was frequently used to signify a date A.D. In
Spain, although not unknown as early as the seventh century, the use of
the Christian Era, as will presently be shown, did not become general until
after the middle of the fourteenth century.

Pre-Christian chronology

Of the chronological systems previously in use it will be sufficient to
briefly describe a few.

The Greeks dated events by Olympiads, or periods of four years intervening
between successive celebrations of the Olympic games, and this mode of
computation, having been largely adopted at Rome, continued to be frequently
used in the first centuries of Christianity. The Olympiads started from
776 B.C., and consequently A.D. 1 was the fourth year of the 194th Olympiad.

The Romans frequently reckoned from the traditional foundation of their city
(ab urbe conditâ--A.U.C.), which date, as has been said, coincided with 753
B.C. They likewise often designated years by the names of the consuls then
in office (e.g. console Planco). Sometimes the Romans dated by post-consular
years (i.e. so long after the consulate of a well-known man). Naturally
the regnal years of Roman emperors presently supplanted those of consuls,
whose power in later times was merely nominal, and from the emperors this
method of describing dates was imitated by popes, kings, and other rulers,
with or without the addition of the year A.D. It became in fact universal
in the Middle Ages, and it subsists in documents, both ecclesiastical and
civil, down to our own day.

Regnal years

The pontifical years of the popes are historically important (see
chronological list in article POPE). Care must be taken, of course,
in the case of such dates, to observe from what point of time each
reign is reckoned. In an elective monarchy like the papacy there is
necessarily an interval between successive reigns, which is occasionally
considerable. Moreover, the reckoning is sometimes from the election of a
pontiff, sometimes from his coronation.

In determining dates by the regnal years of other sovereigns there are of
course various points to which attention must be paid. Confining ourselves
to English history, the earlier kings after the Norman Conquest dated
their reigns only from their coronation, or some other public exhibition of
sovereignty, so that there was sometimes an interval of days or even weeks
between the close of one reign and the commencement of the next. Only from
the accession of Richard II (22 June, 1377) was the reign of a monarch held
to begin with the death or deposition of his predecessor. Even subsequently
to this it was reckoned sometimes from the day itself upon which the preceding
monarch ceased to reign, sometimes from the day following. Not till the first
year of Queen Elizabeth was it enacted that the former should be the rule. In
certain particular instances the matter was still further complicated. King
John dated his reign from his coronation, 27 May, 1199, but this being
the Feast of the Ascension, his years were counted from one occurrence of
this festival to the next, and were accordingly of varying length. Edward
I dated from noon, 20 November, 1272, and in consequence this day in each
year of his reign was partly in one regnal year and partly in another. In
the civil wars of York and Lancaster, Henry VI and Edward IV equally
ignored the period during which his rival assumed or recovered power, and
counted their years continuously onwards from the time when they mounted the
throne. Charles II, though he began to reign de facto only at the Restoration
(29 May, 1660), reckoned his years, de jure, from his father's execution,
30 January, 1648-9, ignoring the Commonwealth and Protectorate. Queen Mary
Tudor reckoned her reign from the death of Edward VI, 6 July, 1553, but
the interval until 19 July of the same year being occupied by the abortive
reign of Lady Jane Grey, public documents in her name commence only with
the latter date. William III and Mary II began to reign 13 Feb., 1688-9, as
"William and Mary". Mary died 28 December, 1694, when the style was altered
to "William" alone; but no change was made in the computation of regnal
years. Within the year, it was long usual to specify dates by reference
to some well-known feast in the ecclesiastical calendar, as, for instance,
"the Friday before Pentecost" or "the day of St. John the Baptist".

Indictions

In papal and other documents, another epoch is often added, namely, the
Indiction. This had originally been a period of fifteen years, at the
close of which the financial accounts of the Roman Empire were balanced;
but for purposes of chronology the indictions are conventional periods
of fifteen years, the first of which began in the reign of Constantine the
Great. Unlike the Olympiads, the indictions themselves were not numbered, but
only the place of a year in the indiction in which it fell. Thus indictione
quartâ; signifies not "in the fourth indiction", but "in the fourth year
of its indiction", whatever this was. It was obvious that such an element
of computation could serve only to verify more precisely the date of a year
already approximately known. Moreover, the indictions were calculated on
different systems, which have to be understood and distinguished:

    The Greek, Constantinian, or Constantinopolitan Indictions were reckoned
    from 1 September, 312. These were chiefly used in the East.

    The Imperial, Cæsarean, or Western Indictions commenced with 24
    September, 312. These were usually adopted in Western Christendom. They
    appear to have been of Anglo-Saxon origin, and to have owed their
    popularity to the authority of the Venerable Bede. The day he chose
    for the starting point was due to an erroneous astronomical calculation
    which made the autumnal equinox fall on 24 September. Further confusion
    was caused by the mistake of some chroniclers who wrongly began the
    indictional cycle a year late--24 September, 313.

    The Roman, Papal, or Pontifical Indictions, introduced in the ninth
    century, made the series start from the first day of the civil year,
    which was in some cases 25 December, in others 1 January. This system
    was also common in Western Christendom, but in spite of its appellation
    it was by no means exclusively used in papal documents.

Beginning of the year

The date at which the year commenced varied at different periods and in
different countries. When Julius Caesar reformed the calendar (45 B.C.) he
fixed 1 January as New Year's Day, a character which it seems never quite to
have lost, even among those who for civil and legal purposes chose another
starting point. The most common of such starting points were 25 March (Feast
of the Annunciation, "Style of the Incarnation") and 25 December (Christmas
Day, "Style of the Nativity"). In England before the Norman Conquest (1066)
the year began either on 25 March or 25 December; from 1087 to 1155 on 1
January; and from 1155 till the reform of the calendar in 1752 on 25 March,
so that 24 March was the last day of one year, and 25 March the first day
of the next. But though the legal year was thus reckoned, it is clear
that 1 January was commonly spoken of as New Year's Day. In Scotland,
from 1 January, 1600, the beginning of the year was reckoned from that
day. In France the year was variously reckoned: from Christmas Day, from
Easter eve, or from 25 March. Of all starting points a movable feast like
Easter is obviously the worst. From 1564 the year was reckoned in France
from 1 January to 31 December. In Germany the reckoning was anciently from
Christmas, but in 1544 and onwards, from 1 January to 31 December. In Rome
and a great part of Italy, it was from 25 December, until Pope Gregory XIII
reformed the calendar (1582) and fixed 1 January as the first day of the
year. The years, however, according to which papal Bulls are dated still
commence with Christmas Day. Spain, with Portugal and Southern France,
observed an era of its own long after the rest of Christendom had adopted
that of Dionysius. This era of Spain or of the Cæsars, commenced with
1 January, 38 B.C., and remained in force in the Kingdom of Castile and
Leon till A.D. 1383, when a royal edict commanded the substitution of the
Christian Era. In Portugal the change was not made till 1422. No satisfactory
explanation has been found of the date from which this era started.

The Gregorian reform

The introduction of the Gregorian Calendar entailed various discrepancies
between the dates which different people assigned to the same events. The
Julian system of time-measurements, introduced by Cæsar, was not sufficiently
accurate, as it made the year slightly too long, with the result that by the
sixteenth century it had fallen ten days in arrear, so that, for instance,
the day of the vernal equinox, which should have been called 21 March, was
called 11 March. To remedy this, besides substituting an improved system
which should prevent the error from operating in future, it was necessary to
omit ten full days in order to bring things back to the proper point. Pope
Gregory XIII, who introduced the reformed system, or "New Style", ordained
that ten days in October, 1582, should not be counted, the fourth of that
month being immediately followed by the fifteenth. He moreover determined
that the year should begin with 1 January, and in order to prevent the Julian
error from causing retardation in the future as in the past, he ruled that
three leap years should be omitted in every four centuries, viz. those of
the centennial years the first two figures of which are not exact multiples
of four, as 1700, 1800, 1900, 2100, etc. The New Style (N.S.) was speedily
adopted by Catholic States, but for a long time the Protestant States
retained the Old (O.S.), from which there followed important differences
in marking dates according as one or other style was followed. In the
first place there was the original difference of ten days between them,
increased to eleven by the O.S. 29 February in A.D. 1700, to twelve days
in 1800, and to thirteen in 1900. Moreover, the period from 1 January to
24 March inclusive, which was the commencement of the year according to
N.S., according to O.S. was the conclusion of the year previous. From want
of attention to this, important events have sometimes been misquoted by a
year. In illustration may be considered the death of Queen Elizabeth. This
occurred in what was then styled in England 24 March 1602, being the last
day of that year. In France and wherever the N.S. prevailed, this day was
described as 3 April, 1603. To avoid all possible ambiguity such dates are
frequently expressed in fractional form as 24 March/3 April, 1602/3. In
our modern histories years are always given according to N.S., but dates
are otherwise left as they were originally recorded. Thus Queen Elizabeth
is said to have died 24 March, 1603. Not till 1700 was the Gregorian reform
accepted by the Protestant States of Germany and the Low Countries, and not
till 1752 by Great Britain, there being by that time a difference of eleven
days between O.S. and N.S. Sweden, after some strange vacillation, followed
suit in 1753. O.S. was still followed by Russia and other Eastern Orthodox
countries well into the twentieth century, and their dates consequently
were thirteen days behind those of the rest of Christendom.

Julian period

The Christian Era has this disadvantage for chronological purposes, that dates
have to be reckoned backwards or forwards according as they are B.C. or A.D.,
whereas in an ideally perfect system all events would be reckoned in one
sequence. The difficulty was to find a starting point whence to reckon,
for the beginnings of history in which this should naturally be placed
are those of which chronologically we know least. At one period it was
attempted to date from the Creation (A.M. or Anno Mundi), that event being
placed by Christian chronologists, such as Archbishop Usher, in 4004 B.C.,
and by the Jews in 3761 B.C. But any attempt thus to determine the age of
the world has been long since abandoned. In the year 1583, however--that
following the Gregorian reform--Joseph Justus Scaliger introduced a basis
of calculation which to a large extent served the purpose required,
and, according to Sir John Herschel, first introduced light and order
into chronology. This was the Julian Period--one of 7980 Julian years,
i.e. years of which every fourth one contains 366 days. The same number of
Gregorian years would contain 60 days less. For historians these commence
with the midnight preceding 1 January, 4713 B.C., for astronomers with the
following noon. The period 7980 was obtained by multiplying together 28,
19, and 15, being respectively the number of years in the Solar Cycles
the Lunar Cycle, and the Roman Indiction, and the year 4713 B.C. was that
for which the number of each of these subordinate cycles equals 1. The
astronomical day is reckoned from noon to noon instead of from midnight to
midnight. Scaliger calculated his period for the meridian of Alexandria to
which Ptolemy had referred his calculation.

Other eras

Various eras employed by historians and chroniclers may be briefly mentioned,
with the dates from which they were computed.

    The Chinese Era dates probably from 2700 B.C., and time is computed by
      cycles of sixty lunar years, each shorter by eleven days than ordinary
      solar years.
    Era of Abraham, from 1 October, 2016 B.C.
    Era of the Olympiads, 13 July, 776 B.C., and continued to A.D. 396
      (Olympiad 293).
    Era of the Foundation of Rome, 21 April, 753 B.C.
    Era of Nabonassar, 26 February, 747, the basis of all calculations
      of Ptolemy.
    Era of Alexander, 12 November, 324 B.C.
    Greek Era of Seleucus, 1 September, 312 B.C.
    Era of Tyre, 19 October, 125 B.C.
    Cæsarian Era of Antioch, 9 August, 48 B.C., instituted to commemorate
      the battle of Pharsalia.
    Julian Era, 1 January, 45 B.C., instituted on the Julian reformation
      of the calendar.
    Era of Spain or of the Cæsars, 1 January, 38 B.C.
    Era of Augustus, 2 September, 31 B.C., instituted to commemorate the
      Battle of Actium.
    Egyptian Year, 29 August, 26 B.C., instituted on the reformation of
      the Egyptian calendar by Augustus.
    Era of Martyrs or of Diocletian, 29 August, A.D. 284, employed by
      Eusebius and early ecclesiastical writers.
    Era of the Armenians, 9 July A.D. 552, commemorates the consummation of
      the Armenian schism by their condemnation of the Council of Chalcedon.
    Era of the Hegira, 16 July, A.D. 622, dates from the entrance of Mohammed
      into Medina after his flight from Mecca; its years are lunar, of 354
      days each, except in intercalary years, of which there are eleven in
      each cycle of thirty. In these there are 355 days.
    Persian Era of Yezdegird III, 16 June, A.D. 632. 

At the French Revolution it was determined to introduce an entirely new
system of chronology, dating from that event and having no affinity with
any previously adopted. In the first form this was the Era of Liberty,
commencing 1 January, 1789. This was soon replaced by the Republican Era,
at first appointed to commence 1 January, 1792, and afterwards 22 September,
1792. This was the date of the proclamation of the Republic, which coincided
with the autumnal equinox, calculated on the meridian of Paris. The year was
divided into twelve months of thirty days each, and the days into decades,
weeks being abolished. The months had names given to them according to
their seasonal character.

    The autumnal months (22 Sept. onwards) were Vendémiaire (Vintage),
      Brumaire (Foggy), Frimaire (Sleety).
    Winter Months: Nivose (Snowy), Pluviose (Rainy), Ventose (Blowy).
    Spring Months: Germinal (Budding), Floréal (Flowery), Prairial (Meadowy).
    Summer Months: Messidor (Harvesting), Thermidor (Torrid), Fructidor
      (Fruitful).

As these months contained only 360 days, five jours complémentaires were
added at the end of Fructidor, officially called Primidi, Duodi, Tridi,
Quartidi, Quintidi, but commonly known as Sans-culottides. Olympic or
leap years occurred every fourth year of the Republic, and had a sixth
intermediary day called Sextidi. The period thus terminated was called
Franciade. This calendar was enforced in France till 1 January, 1806, when
it was abolished by Napoleon, and the use of the Gregorian calendar resumed.

Days of the month and week

Various methods have been devised for ascertaining upon what day of the week
any given date falls. The best known is that of Dominical Letters, which
has this disadvantage, that a table is usually required to find out what
is the Dominical Letter for the year in question. Complication is likewise
caused by the necessity of passing from one letter to another in leap years,
on reaching the intercalary day in February. The following method is free
from these inconveniences, and can be worked without any reference to tables:

The days of the week are numbered according to their natural order,
viz. Sunday=1, Monday=2, Tuesday=3, Wednesday=4, Thursday=5, Friday=6,
Saturday=7. (At the time from which the Christian Era starts there were of
course no weeks, such a measure of time not being known among the Greeks
and Romans. Counting backwards, however, according to our present system, we
can divide all time into weeks, and it is to be noted that in the Christian
period the order of days of the week has never been interrupted. Thus,
when Gregory XIII reformed the Calendar, in 1582, Thursday, 4 October,
was followed by Friday, 15 October. So in England, in 1752, Wednesday, 2
September, was followed by Thursday, 14 September. What we style 14 August,
1907, the Russians style 1 August, but both call it Wednesday.) For our
present purpose the year commences with March; January and February being
reckoned as the 11th and 12th months of the preceding year; thus 29 February,
when it occurs, is the last day of the year and causes no further disturbance.

As a matter of fact, it is found by computation that 1 March of the year
known as A.D. 1 was a Tuesday. Assigning to this year the figure 1 as its
year number, to March the figure 1 as its month number, and adding these to
1, the day number of 1 March, we get 3, indicating Tuesday the third day of
the weeks. From this first datum all the rest follows. The succeeding days
of March increase their figures each by 1, on account of the increased day
number. When 7 is passed it is only the figures which remain, after division
by that number, which are to be considered; thus 11 may be treated as 4 (7+4)
and 30 as 2 (28+2). In general, any exact multiple of 7 (14, 21, 28) may be
added or subtracted when convenient without affecting the result. Instead
of adding any number (e.g. 1 or 4) we may subtract its difference from 7 or
a multiple of 7 (e.g. 6 or 3). The remainder 0 in a division is equivalent
to 7, and thus in calculating for the day of the week it signifies Saturday.

As the days of the leading month, so those of the months preceding it follow
naturally. As March contains 31 days (i.e. 28+3), April necessarily begins
with a day 3 places later in the weekly sequence, and its month number instead
of 1 is 4. So of other months, according to the number of days in that which
preceded. The following are the month numbers throughout the year which never
change:--March 1; April 4; May 6; June 2; July 4; August 0; September 3;
October 5; November 1; December 3; January 6; February 2. A.D. 1, being a
common year of 365 days (or 52 weeks+1 day), ends with the same day of the
week--Tuesday--with which it commenced. Consequently the next year, A.D. 2,
commences a day later, with Wednesday for 1 March, and as its year number
is increased to 2, we get 2+1+1=4. So in A.D. 3, the year number becomes 3,
and 1 March is Thursday. But on account of 29 February preceding 1 March,
A.D. 4, this day falls 366 days (or 52 weeks+2 days) after 1 March, A.D. 3,
or on Saturday, and its year number must be increased to 5; 5+1+1=7. Thus, to
find the number belonging to any year within its own century, we must find how
many days beyond an exact number of weeks there have been since that century
commenced. As every common year contains one day more than fifty-two weeks,
and every leap year two days more, by adding at any period the number of leap
years which there have been in the century to the total number of years in
the same, we obtain the number of days required. To obtain the number of
leap years, we divide the last two figures of the date (i.e. those in the
tens and units place) by four. The quotient (neglecting any remainder) shows
the number of leap years; which, added to the same two figures, gives the
number of days over and above the sets of fifty-two weeks which the years
contain. Thus, for example, the year '39 of any century (939, 1539, 1839,
1939) will have 6 for its year number; for in such year 48 extra days will
have accumulated since the corresponding day of the centurial year (00),
viz. 1 day for each of the 30 common years, and 18 days for the 9 leap years.

The century

One more element of calculation remains to be considered - the Century. We
begin with the Julian system, or Old Style (O.S.)--according to which all
centuries contain 75 common years of 365 days, and 25 leap years of 366,
and accordingly 125 days in all, over and above 5200 weeks. But 125 days=17
weeks+6 days. Therefore a Julian century ends with the day of the week two
days previous to that with which if began, and the succeeding century will
begin with the day of the week, one day earlier than its predecessor. Thus,
A.D. 1 March, 1300, being Tuesday, in 1400 it would be Monday, in 1500 Sunday,
in 1600 Saturday. Having obtained the centurial number for any century, we
add to it the year numbers of the years which follow to the close of that
century. Centurial numbers O.S. are obtained by subtracting the centurial
figure or figures (viz. those preceding 00) from the multiple of 7 next
above, the remainder being the number required. Thus for A.D. 1100 the
centurial number is 3 (14-11), for 1500, 6 (21-15), for 1900, 2 (21-19).

Under the N.S. three centuries in every four contain 76 common years and 24
leap years, and thus have only 124 days over 5200 weeks, or 17 weeks and 5
days, and end with the day of the week three earlier than they began. The
following century, beginning two days earlier than that which it follows,
has its centurial number less by 2. Thus 1 March, A.D. 1700, was Monday,
and the centurial number 0 (or 7). 1 March, 1800, was Saturday, and the
centurial number 5. Every fourth centurial year N.S., being a leap year
(1600, 2000, 2400, etc.), has 366 days; and the century to which it belongs,
like those of the O.S., diminishes its centurial number only by 1 from the
preceding. N.S. having been introduced in the sixteenth century, it is only
for dates 15-- and upwards that N.S. centurial numbers are required. They
are as follows: for 1500=3; 1600=2; 1700=7; 1800=5; 1900=3; 2000=2. It will
be seen that the same figures constantly recur. Leap year centuries (with
the first two figures exactly divisible by 4) having the centurial number 2,
and the three centuries following having 7 (or 0), 5, and 3 respectively,
after which 2 comes round again. The centurial number N.S. can be obtained
from that of O.S. if the difference of days between O.S. and N.S. be
allowed for. This is done by subtracting the said difference from the
O.S. centurial number, increased by as many times 7 as the subtraction
requires. As we have seen, for the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries,
the difference was 10 days; for the eighteenth, 11; for the nineteenth,
12; for the twentieth and twenty-first, 13. Thus:

A.D. 1500 etc. 	C. N. (O.S.) = 6	(N.S.) = 3 	(6+7-10).
A.D. 1600 	do. = 5	do. = 2 	(5+7-10).
A.D. 1700 	do. = 4	do. = 0 	(7) (4+7-11).
A.D. 1800 	do. = 3	do. = 5 	(3+14-12).
A.D. 1900 	do. = 2	do. = 3 	(2+14-13).
A.D. 2000 	do. = 1	do. = 2 	(1+14-13).

Rule to find day of week for any date: Take the sum of the centurial
number+year number+month number+day number; divide this by 7; the remainder
gives day of week, O.S. or N.S., according to century number used.

Examples

(1) King John was crowned 27 May, 1199. What day?
Century (O.S.)		Year 		Month		Day	
3	+ 	4	+	6 or
6(27=21+6)	+	27	= 40 = 7x5+5
Therefore the day was Thursday.

(2) Waterloo was fought 18 June, 1815. What day?
Century (N.S.)		Year 		Month		Day	
5	+ 	18 or
4(18=14+4)	+ 	2	+	18 	= 43 = 7x6+1
Therefore the day was Sunday, as readers of "Vanity Fair" will recollect.

(3) Columbus discovered the New World 12 October, 1492. What day?
Century (O.S.)		Year 		Month		Day	
0	+ 	3	+	5 	+	12	= 20/7; remainder 6
Therefore the day was Friday.

(4) If St. Patrick died 17 March, 463, required the day of the week.
Century (O.S.)		Year 		Month		Day	
3	+ 	1	+	1 	+	17	= 22/7; remainder 1
Therefore the day was Sunday.

(5) Mary Queen of Scots was executed 8 February, 1587 (1586/7), which was
    a Wednesday. Was this O.S.or N.S.?
Century (O.S.)		Year 1586 		Month		Day	
6	+ 	2	+	2 	+	8	= 18 =Wednesday
It was O.S.

According to N.S. it would be:--
Century (N.S.)		Year 1586 		Month		Day	
3	+ 	2	+	2 	+	8	= 15 =Sunday
This is an illustration of February being reckoned in the preceding year.

About this page

APA citation. Gerard, J. (1908). General Chronology. In The Catholic
Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company. Retrieved June 25, 2020
from New Advent: http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/03738a.htm

MLA citation. Gerard, John. "General Chronology." The Catholic
Encyclopedia. Vol. 3. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1908. 25 Jun. 2020
<http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/03738a.htm>.

Transcription. This article was transcribed for New Advent by Rick McCarty.

Ecclesiastical approbation. Nihil Obstat. November 1, 1908. Remy Lafort,
S.T.D., Censor. Imprimatur. +John Cardinal Farley, Archbishop of New York.

Contact information. The editor of New Advent is Kevin Knight. My email
address is webmaster at newadvent.org. Regrettably, I can't reply to every
letter, but I greatly appreciate your feedback - especially notifications
about typographical errors and inappropriate ads.

Copyright © 2020 by Kevin Knight. Dedicated to the Immaculate Heart of Mary.

END



from https://www.history.com/news/why-do-we-have-leap-year

BEGIN

    Feb 20, 2020

5 Things You May Not Know About Leap Day

The extra day tacked on to every fourth year is a subtle admission that
even something as regular and simple as a calendar can be more complicated
than we think.

    Stephen Wood

Nearly every four years, we add an extra day to the calendar in the form
of February 29, also known as Leap Day. Put simply, these additional 24
hours are built into the calendar to ensure that it stays in line with
the Earth's movement around the Sun. While the modern calendar contains
365 days, the actual time it takes for Earth to orbit its star is slightly
longer-roughly 365.2421 days. The difference might seem negligible, but
over decades and centuries that missing quarter of a day per year can add
up. To ensure consistency with the true astronomical year, it is necessary
to periodically add in an extra day to make up the lost time and get the
calendar back in synch with the heavens.

1. Many ancient calendars had entire leap months

Many calendars, including the Hebrew, Chinese and Buddhist calendars, are
lunisolar, meaning their dates indicate the position of the Moon as well as
the position of Earth relative to the sun. Since there is a natural gap of
roughly 11 days between a year as measured by lunar cycles and one measured by
the Earth's orbit, such calendars periodically require the addition of extra
months, known as intercalary or interstitial months, to keep them on track.

Intercalary months, however, were not necessarily regular. Historians are
still unclear as to how the early Romans kept track of their years, mostly
because the Romans themselves may not have been entirely sure. It appears
that the early Roman calendar consisted of ten months plus an ill-defined
winter period, the varying length of which caused the calendar to become
unpegged from the solar year. Eventually, this uncertain stretch of time
was replaced by the new months of January and February, but the situation
remained complicated. They employed a 23-day intercalary month known as
Mercedonius to account for the difference between their year and the solar
year, inserting it not between months but within the month of February for
reasons that may have been related to lunar cycles.

To make matters even more confusing, the decision of when to hold Mercedonius
often fell to the consuls, who used their ability to shorten or extend the
year to their own political ends. As a result, by the time of Julius Caesar,
the Roman year and the solar year were thoroughly out of sync.

2. Julius Caesar introduced Leap Day, with help from the Egyptians...

The Mercedonius-when-we-feel-like-it system apparently irked Caesar, the
general-turned-consul-turned-dictator of Rome who drastically altered the
course of European history. In addition to conquering Gaul and transforming
Rome from a republic into an empire, Caesar re-ordered the Roman calendar,
giving us the blueprint off of which much of the world still operates to
this day.

During his time in Egypt, Caesar became convinced of the superiority of
the Egyptian solar calendar, which featured 365 days and an occasional
intercalary month which was inserted when astronomers observed the correct
conditions in the stars. Caesar and the philosopher Sosigenes of Alexandria
made one important modification: instead of relying on the stars, they
would simply add a day to every fourth year. In keeping with the Roman
tradition of messing with the length of February, that day would fall in
the second month of the year-thus Leap Day was born. Caesar added two
extra-long months to the year 46 BCE to make up for missed intercalations,
and the Julian Calendar took effect on January 1st, 45 BCE.

3. ...but their math was a little off

By the 16th century, scholars had noticed that time was still
slipping-Caesar's calculation that a year lasted 365.25 days was close,
but still overestimated the solar year by 11 minutes. This was a problem
for the Catholic Church, as the date of Easter had drifted away from its
traditional place, the first Sunday after the first full moon following
the vernal equinox, by roughly ten days. Pope Gregory XIII commissioned a
modified calendar, one which kept Leap Day but accounted for the inaccuracy
by eliminating it on centurial years not divisible by 400 (1700, 1800, and
1900 were not leap years, but 2000 was). The introduction of the Gregorian
Calendar marked the last change to the Western calendar as we know it today.

Experts note that the Gregorian calculation of a solar year-365.2425
days-is still not perfect, and thus another correction will be
necessary. Thankfully, the Gregorian calendar is only off by about one day
every 3,030 years, so mankind has some time before this becomes a problem.

4. Leap Day is often associated with marriage, proposals and flipping
gender roles

Curiously, many Leap Day customs have revolved around romance and
marriage. Tradition holds that in 5th-century Ireland, St. Bridget lamented
to St. Patrick that women were not allowed to propose marriage to men. So
legend has it that St. Patrick designated the only day that does not occur
annually, February 29, as a day on which women would be allowed to propose
to men. In some places, Leap Day thus became known as Bachelor's Day.

This tradition hopped the Irish Sea to Scotland and England, where the
British added a twist-if a man rejected a woman's proposal, he owed her a
debt of several pairs of fine gloves, perhaps to hide the fact that she did
not have an engagement ring. In Greek tradition, however, it is considered
bad luck to marry on Leap Day, and statistics suggest that Greek couples
continue to take this superstition seriously.

5. People born on Leap Day are called 'Leaplings'

There are only about 5 million people in the whole world who were born
on February 29, with the odds of being born on Leap Day standing at about
1-in-1,461. Several famous people-including actress and singer Dinah Shore
(born 1916), motivational speaker Tony Robbins (born 1960) and hip-hop
artist Ja Rule (born 1976)-are leaplings. Leaplings technically only get
to celebrate their birthdays once every four years, but they do get to be
part of an elite group.

By
Stephen Wood

END



from
https://www.history.com/news/6-things-you-may-not-know-about-the-gregorian-calendar

BEGIN

Updated:
    Aug 22, 2018
Original:
    Sep 13, 2012

6 Things You May Not Know About the Gregorian Calendar

Explore the history of the Gregorian calendar, which Britain and its colonies
adopted 260 years ago.

    Jennie Cohen

1. The original goal of the Gregorian calendar was to change the date of
Easter.  In 1582, when Pope Gregory XIII introduced his Gregorian calendar,
Europe adhered to the Julian calendar, first implemented by Julius Caesar
in 46 B.C. Since the Roman emperor's system miscalculated the length of
the solar year by 11 minutes, the calendar had since fallen out of sync
with the seasons. This concerned Gregory because it meant that Easter,
traditionally observed on March 21, fell further away from the spring
equinox with each passing year.

2. Leap years don't really occur every four years in the Gregorian calendar.
The Julian calendar included an extra day in February every four years. But
Aloysus Lilius, the Italian scientist who developed the system Pope Gregory
would unveil in 1582, realized that the addition of so many days made the
calendar slightly too long. He devised a variation that adds leap days in
years divisible by four, unless the year is also divisible by 100. If the
year is also divisible by 400, a leap day is added regardless. While this
formula may sound confusing, it did resolve the lag created by Caesar's
earlier scheme-almost.

3. The Gregorian calendar differs from the solar year by 26 seconds
per year.  Despite Lilius' ingenious method for syncing the calendar
with the seasons, his system is still off by 26 seconds. As a result, in
the years since Gregory introduced his calendar in 1582, a discrepancy of
several hours has arisen. By the year 4909, the Gregorian calendar will be
a full day ahead of the solar year.

4. Some Protestants viewed the Gregorian calendar as a Catholic plot.
Though Pope Gregory's papal bull reforming the calendar had no power
beyond the Catholic Church, Catholic countries-including Spain, Portugal
and Italy-swiftly adopted the new system for their civil affairs. European
Protestants, however, largely rejected the change because of its ties to
the papacy, fearing it was an attempt to silence their movement. It wasn't
until 1700 that Protestant Germany switched over, and England held out until
1752. Orthodox countries clung to the Julian calendar until even later,
and their national churches have never embraced Gregory's reforms.

5. Britain's adoption of the Gregorian calendar sparked riots and
protest-maybe.  According to some accounts, English citizens did not react
kindly after an act of Parliament advanced the calendar overnight from
September 2 to September 14, 1752. Rioters supposedly took to the streets,
demanding that the government 'give us our 11 days.' However, most
historians now believe that these protests never occurred or were greatly
exaggerated. On the other side of the Atlantic, meanwhile, Benjamin Franklin
welcomed the change, writing, 'It is pleasant for an old man to be able
to go to bed on September 2, and not have to get up until September 14.'

6. Before the Gregorian calendar's adoption, the English new year
began on March 25, or Lady Day.  Julius Caesar's calendar reform of 46
B.C. instituted January 1 as the first of the year. During the Middle Ages,
however, European countries replaced it with days that carried greater
religious significance, such as December 25 (the anniversary of Jesus'
birth) and March 25 (the Feast of the Annunciation). The latter, known as
Lady Day because it celebrates the Virgin Mary, marked the beginning of
the year in Britain until January 1, 1752.


By
Jennie Cohen

END

