
From the Internet ...

Including:
  Daniel Burrows
  http://toto.lib.unca.edu/findingaids/mss/speculation_lands/terms/surveying_terms.htm
  https://www.genealogy.com/articles/research/glossary-a.html
  https://www.ancestry.com
  https://www.directlinesoftware.com
  Joseph R. Klett
  MEL


GLOSSARY

Abeyance - A condition of undetermined ownership, as of an estate that has
           not yet been assigned
Abstract - Summary of important points of a given text, especially deeds
           and wills.
Accession - Adding on. In civil law, the right to all that one's property
            produces, not just the property itself.
Acre - See measurements.
Acreage Right - (or Land Right) The share of a land division granted in
                proportion to the proprietary shares held.
ad litem - Legal term meaning in this case only. For example, "George
           Thomas, duly appointed by the court, may administer ad litem
           the settlement of the estate of Joseph Thomas, deceased."
Adm. - Abbreviation for administrator, administration.
Admin. - Abbreviation for administrator, administration.
Administration (of estate) - The collection, management and distribution
                             of an estate by proper legal process.
Administrator (of estate) - Person appointed to manage or divide the estate
                            of a deceased person.
Administratrix - A female administrator.
Admit - see Copyhold.
Admon. - Abbreviation for letters of administration.
Ad quod damnum - A writ causing an evaluation of damages that might result
                 from someone's actions. Example: you wish to dam a creek
                 on your land to power a mill. The pond may damage another's
                 land.
Adverse Possession - Gaining title to another's land by exercising the
                     rights of ownership of that land unchallenged for a
                     period of time, typically on the order of five to ten
                     years, and meeting other requirements (as set by each
                     state). See seizin.
Affidavit - A statement in writing, sworn to before proper authority.
A Frame - A measuring device built in the shape of an A. The distance between
          the legs is 6.6 feet (one tenth of a chain. To measure the acreage
          of a small square parcel, multiply the width and height in "A's"
          and move the decimal point three places to the left. For example,
          a square that is 6 A's wide and 4 A's tall is .024 acres.
Ahnentafel - Ancestor table, tabulates the ancestry of one individual
             by generation in text rather than pedigree chart format. A
             comprehensive ahnentafel gives more than the individual's name,
             date and place of birth, christening, marriage, death and
             burial. It should give biographical and historical commentary
             for each person listed, as well as footnotes citing the source
             documents used to prove what is stated.
Ahnentafel Number - The unique number assigned to each position in an
                    ancestor table is called an ahnentafel number. Number one
                    designates the person in the first generation. Numbers
                    two and three designate the parents of number one and the
                    second generation. Numbers four through seven designate
                    the grandparents of person number one and the third
                    generation. As the ahnentafel extends by generation,
                    the number of persons doubles.
AKA - Also known as; alias.
Alder - a type of tree.
Alien - Foreigner; (or Aliene, Alienate) to transfer or make over to another;
        to convey.
Alienation - A transfer of title or property to another.
Aliquot - The description of fractional section ownership used in the
          U.S. public land states. A parcel is generally identified by its
          section, township, and range. The aliquot specifies its precise
          location within the section, for example, the northwest quarter
          of the southeast quarter.
Allodial - see alodium
Allowances - A deduction of acreage reserved for a specific purpose, such as
             a public road, highway or right-of-way. In colonial New Jersey,
             the King's Highways were by law to be six rods (ninety-nine
             feet) in breadth. If a highway was a property boundary (which
             was typical), then the allowance would be half this measure,
             or 49.5 feet.
Alodium - Land owned independently, without rent or other obligation to
          another. See Freehold Estate. The alodial (also 'allodial')
          system is opposed to the feudal system.
American Revolution - U.S. war for independence from Great Britain 1775
                      - 1783.
Ancestor - A person from whom you are descended; a forefather.
Ancestral File - A genealogical system developed ty the Family History
                 Department of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
                 Saints (LDS Church), links individuals to ancestors in
                 pedigree, family group, and descendant formats. It contains
                 genealogical information about millions of people from
                 many nations.
Ancestry - Denotes all of your ancestors from your parents as far back
           as they are traceable. Estimates suggest that everyone has
           approximately 65,000 traceable ancestors, meaning ancestors
           whose existence can be documented in surviving records.
Anon. - Abbreviation for anonymous.
Annotation - Interpretation, explanation, clarification, definition, or
             supplement. Many types of genealogical presentations contain
             statements, record sources, documents, conclusions, or other
             historical information that require an annotation. Generally,
             annotations appear in footnotes, end-notes, or in the text
             itself. Genealogical software provides a field for documentation,
             comments, notes, and analysis. Genealogists use annotations
             to explain discrepancies between two or more documents, to
             add information from another source to support a statement or
             conclusion made in a different record, and other difficult to
             interpret situations.
Ante - Latin prefix meaning before, such as in ante-bellum South, "The
       South before the war".
Antebellum - Before the Civil War.
Appr. - Abbreviation for appraisal; appraisement.
Apprentice - One who is bound by indentures or by legal agreement or by any
             means to serve another person for a certain time, with a view
             of learning an art or trade.
Appurtenance - That which belongs to something else such as a building,
               orchard, right of way, etc.
Archives - Records of a government, organization, institution; the place
           where records are stored.
Arpent - Unit of length and area used in France, Louisiana, and Canada. As
         a unit of length, approximately 191.8 feet (180 old French 'pied',
         or foot). The (square) arpent is a unit of area, approximately
         .845 acres, or 36,802 square feet.
Arroyo - A small steep-walled (usually) dry watercourse with a flat floor. A
         gulch or gully. Chiefly in the U.S. southwest.
Ash - has tough, straight-grained wood.
Aspen - a type of poplar.
Assee - Abbreviation for Assignee.
Assignee - See assigns. Often seen in conjunction with land warrants which
           were assigned (sold) to speculators.
Assignment - Grant of property or a legal right, benefit, or privilege to
             another person.
Assigns - (or Assignees) Those to whom property or a right has been
          transferred (as compared to heirs, who hold hereditary rights).
Associates - In early New Jersey, a group of settlers and/or landowners
             (such as in Elizabeth-Town) who corporately administer local
             land distribution, etc. See also Charter, Corporation.
Attachment - The act or process of seizing property by judicial order and
             bringing the same into the custody of the law. See also Lien.
Attest - To affirm; to certify by signature or oath.
At will - Terminable by the lord of the manor at any time.
Auditor's map - was made by the County Surveyor at the request of the auditor
                for tax purposes. Many were made in the 1800's. Very little
                field work was done. The map was created by the use of
                various documents, piecing together other surveys, a few
                rough measurements in the field, etc. Generally, not accurate.
Authenticate - Prove a document is not a forgery.
Azimuth - The number of degrees from north (or other reference direction)
          that a line runs, measured clockwise.
b. - Abbreviation for born.
B - Abbreviation for black, indicating race.
Back sight - After measuring from point A to B, reading the heading from
             B back to A. Various factors can cause the headings to not be
             exactly the reverse of one another.
Balls - Slang for numeric .00, as in 4-balls (4.00)
Bank - Edge of a stream.
Banns - Public announcement of intended marriage.
Bapt. - Abbreviation for baptized.
Bargain - Mutual agreement among two or more people to exchange or purchase
          goods.
Bargain and Sale Deed - A type of deed in which title is transfered but
                        in which there is usually no guarantee as to the
                        validity of title.
Base-born - A base-born individual was an illegitimate child.
Baseline - In the U.S. Public land surveying system, a surveyed east-west
           (i.e. latitudinal) reference line, often hundreds of miles in
           length, from which tiers of townships are are surveyed to the
           north and south. There are approximately two dozen baselines in
           the lower 48 states. See also meridian.
Basswood - see linden.
Bastard - A bastard is an illegitimate child.
Bearing - See azimuth. Bearings taken with a compass will be referenced to
          magnetic north unless otherwise noted.
Bed and banks - For property lines that cross a body of water, this term
                is used to explicitly refer to the bottom of the water.
Beech - smooth gray bark and small edible nuts.
Bef. - Abbreviation for before.
Benchmark - A survey mark made on a monument having a known location and
            elevation, serving as a reference point for surveying.
Beneficiary - One who receives benefit of trust or property.
Bequeath - (or devise) To give personal property to a person in a will. Noun
           - bequest.
Bequest - A gift of personal property made in a will. See also devise.
Bet. - Abbreviation for between.
B for D - Abbreviation for Bond for Deed.
Bibliography - List of writings relating to a specific subject, some of
               which are annotated. A bibliographic citation describes and
               identifies the author, edition, date of issue, publisher, and
               typography of a book or other written material. Generally,
               bibliographies appear at the end of a publication to
               indicate the sources used by the author or to suggest titles
               for additional reading. Bibliographic citations appear in
               footnotes and end-notes to document the source of a statement
               made in the body of a writing.
Biographies - A biography is a book written about a particular individual. You
              can also find compiled biographies, which are books that
              contain short biographies of many different people. A compiled
              biography normally is about a specific group of people. For
              example, you can find compiled biographies about individuals
              who were involved in a particular profession or who lived
              in a particular area. You can usually find the following
              information in a biography: occupation, accomplishments,
              affiliations, and family information.
Birch, (burch) - a type of tree.
Birth Records - A birth record contains information about the birth of
                an individual. On a birth record, you can usually find the
                mother's full maiden name and the father's full name, the name
                of the baby, the date of the birth, and county where the birth
                took place. Many birth records include other information,
                such as the birthplaces of the baby's parents, the addresses
                of the parents, the number of children that the parents have,
                and the race of the parents, and the parents' occupations.
Black gum - see tupelo.
Blackjack - a type of small oak.
Black oak - a type of tree.
Black walnut - a type of tree.
Blood - To slowly raise the levels rod in order that the instrument man
        can read the foot markings.
Blue topping - In road or grading work the surveyor sets stakes and paints
               their tops blue to represent the required elevation. Graders
               then work to just cover the blue tops of the stakes.
B.O. - Abbreviation for Blackjack Oak, which is used extensively within
       surveys as a marker or point of reference.
Bond - Written, signed, witnessed agreement requiring payment of a specified
       amount of money on or before a given date.
Bond for Deed/Title - A promise to convey land when paid at some point in
                      the future.
Bondsman - Surety, sponsor.
Boot - To raise the levels rod some number of inches so as to be visible
       to the instrument man, e.g. "Boot 6!" means "raise it 6 inches."
Bottom - Land along a river.
Bounds - Pertaining to measuring natural or man-made features on the land.
Bounty Land Warrant - A right to obtain land, specific number of acres of
                      unallocated public land, granted for military service.
Box elder - a type of tree.
Box oak - a type of tree.
bp. - Abbreviation for baptized.
bpt. - Abbreviation for baptized.
Branch - Small stream.
bro. - Abbreviation for brother.
Brook - Small stream.
bu. - Abbreviation for buried.
Buckeye - a type of tree.
Buffaloberry - a type of tree.
Bulletin Board System (bbs) - Bulletin Board Systems are used by many
                              genealogists to share information on a online
                              community forum, such as GenForum.
Bullseye - Zero degrees of inclination.
bur. - Abbreviation for buried.
Burgage - A tenure in which burgesses or townsfolk held lands or tenements of
          the lord, usually for a fixed rent. In Scotland the term related
          to tenure in property in the royal burghs.
Burn one - Measure from the one foot mark on the tape rather than from the end
           of the tape in order to increase the accuracy of the measurement.
Bust - Closure error, i.e. the amount by which the survey fails to perfectly
       close.
Cadastral Map - Land ownership map. Generally used for tax purposes.
Caution - In the U.K., Canada, and elsewhere, a restriction on disposition
          of property by the registered owner, placed by a person who claims
          a right on the property in question.
Caveat - Latin for "let him beware." Relative to property records, a warning
         and written notice that surveyed land was previously appropriated
         (i.e., is already owned), resulting in a resurvey. See also
         Certificate of Mislocation.
c. - Abbreviation for about or around, from the Latin word circa.
ca. - Abbreviation for about or around, from the Latin word circa.
Call - Any feature, landmark, or measurement called out in a survey. For
       example, "two white oaks next to the creek" is a call. So is "North
       3 degrees East 120 poles".
Cedar - a type of tree.
cem. - Abbreviation for cemetery.
Cemetery Records - Cemetery caretakers usually keep records of the names and
                   death dates of those buried, as well as maps of the grave
                   sites. They may also keep more detailed records, including
                   the names of the deceased's relatives. In addition to
                   these paper records, you will find tombstones. Tombstones
                   can provide information such as birth and death dates
                   and the names of other family members.
Census - Official enumeration, listing or counting of citizens.
Certificate of Mislocation - Following a resurvey of lands (see Caveat
                             above), a certificate documenting that an
                             earlier survey was proven to contain acreage
                             previously appropriated and crediting the
                             deficient acreage back to the person with the
                             inferior (later) title.
Certified Copy - A copy made and attested to by officers having charge of
                 the original and authorized to give copies.
Cesser - Failure of a tenant who holds land in return for services to
         perform those services.
Chain - See measurements.
Chain Bearer - (CB) - Also known as chain carrier or sworn chain carrier
               (CC, SCC): they were land surveyor's assistants; handled
               measuring chain. Generally, there was a legal requirement
               that chain carriers take an oath as to the honesty of
               their work; therefore the chain carrier should have been
               of legal age.  It was a common practice for a member of
               the family to serve as a chain bearer for the surveyor. In
               Robert Gibson's 1796 Treatise of Practical Surveying he
               commented that, "The surveyor should be careful to have
               his chain measured before he proceeds [on surveys]..." for
               consistent precision. In the Speculation Lands Collection
               each individual survey consisted of two chain bearers (item
               0712 comprises of three). The rear man or "hinder chainman"
               stood by the starting stake with one end of the chain while
               the front man, carrying the other end unrolled the chain
               as he went toward a mark. Furthermore, Gibson argued that
               the success of a survey, depended on the care and skill of
               the rear chain bearer. He had to ensure that the front man
               was always in line with the mark. "The inaccuracies of most
               surveys arise from bad chaining" recorded Gibson.
Chain carrier - An assistant to the surveyor, the chain carriers moved the
                surveying chain from one location to another under the
                direction of the surveyor. This was a position of some
                responsibility, and the chain carriers took an oath as
                "sworn chain carriers" that they would do their job properly.
Charter - A legal instrument by which a sovereign power assures certain
          rights, liberties or powers. In early New Jersey, charters were
          granted by the governor to the settlers of new towns. See also
          Associates, Corporation.
Chattel - Personal property which can include animate as well as inanimate
          properties.
Cherry - a type of tree.
Chestnut - American chestnut has been virtually destroyed by blight.
Chestnut oak - has leaves resembling a chestnut.
Chittamwood - see Wooly Bumelia.
Chord - The straight line connecting the end points of an arc.
chr. - Abbreviation for christened.
Christen - To receive or initiate into the visible church by baptism;
           to name at baptism; to give a name to.
Christian Name - Names other than a person's last name.
Church Records - Church records are the formal documents that churches have
                 kept about their congregations through the years. Churches
                 normally record information about christenings, baptisms,
                 marriages, and burials. The type of information you will
                 find in the records are the name(s) of the individual(s)
                 involved, the date of the event, the location of the
                 event, and the clergyman's name. You may find additional
                 information, such as parents' names (father's full name and
                 mother's maiden name), the names of witnesses to an event,
                 and the individual's (or family's) place of residence.
Circa - (c, ca) About, near or approximate -- usually referring to a date.
civ. - Abbreviation for civil.
Civil Law - Laws concerned with civil or private rights and remedies,
            as contrasted with criminal law; body of law established by a
            nation, commonwealth, county or city, also called municipal law.
Civil War - War between the States; war between North and South, 1861 - 65.
Claim - see Entry.
Cloud on Title - An apparent claim or encumbrance on a title that would
                 restrict the titleholder's free use of the land. Such
                 encumbrance may or may not be valid, as determined by the
                 court in an action to remove the cloud.
Codicil - Addition to a will.
Collateral - Property put up by someone getting a loan. If they fail to repay
             the loan, the collateral goes to the person granting the loan.
Collateral Ancestor - Belong to the same ancestral stock but not in direct
                      line of descent; opposed to lineal such as aunts,
                      uncles & cousins.
Collateral Line - Line of descent connecting persons who share a common
                  ancestor, but are related through an aunt, uncle, cousin,
                  nephew, etc.
Color of Title - A deed appearing to convey title but in fact not conveying
                 title, either because the grantor did not have title to
                 convey or because the conveyance was flawed in some way.
Colpa - Old Irish measure of land equal to that which can support a horse
        or cow for a year. Approximately an Irish acre of good land.
comm. - Abbreviation for communion, communicant.
Common Ancestor - Ancestor shared by any two people.
Communicant - Person receiving communion in a religious ceremony or service.
Compass - One toise.
Comr D - Abbreviation for Commissioners' Deed.
Concession - A grant of privileges by the government.
Condemn - The taking of privately owned land for public use by eminent
          domain. In the U.S. just compensation must be provided for any
          lands thus taken.
Condemnation - The process by which the property of a private owner is
               taken for public use without his consent, i.e., by forced sale.
Condition - See Conditional line.
Conditional Line - An agreed line between neighbors that has not been
                   surveyed.
conf. - Abbreviation for confirmed.
Confederate - Pertaining to the Southern states which seceded from the
              U.S. in 1860 - 1, their government and their citizens.
Confirmation - (or Confirmatory Grant, Confirmatory Patent) A conveyance of
               property to ensure title, given when a previous conveyance
               of title is or might be questionable or voidable.
Consanguinity - Blood relationship.
Consideration - The cause, motive, price, or impelling influence which
                induces a contracting party to enter into a contract
                or transaction. Typically, the sale price paid by the
                grantee to the grantor; sometimes "love and affection"
                for a family member.
Consort - Usually, a wife whose husband is living.
Convey - To transfer property or the title to property from one person
         to another.
Conveyance - See deed.
Copyhold - A tenancy at will that was recorded in a manorial court ownership
           roll. The lord of the manor maintained the list. Copyholds
           were not, strictly speaking, inheritable, but were customarily
           so. The land reverted to the landowner who would then "admit"
           the heir to the lands of the decedent.
Corner - The beginning or end point of any survey line. When "corner"
         is used, it doesn't necessarily imply that the tract is square.
Corporation - In early New Jersey, an incorporated municipality. See also
              Associates, Charter.
Cottonwood - a type of tree.
Cousin - Relative descended from a common ancestor, but not a brother
         or sister.
Covenant - A stipulation. A promise to do or not do something.
Creek - Small stream.
Cuerda - Traditional unit of area in Puerto Rico. Equal to about .971
         acres. Known as the "Spanish acre". 
Curtilage - In common law, the enclosed land immediately surrounding a
            dwelling house.
Customary Estate - see copyhold
Cut line - To clear vegetation for a line of sight between two survey
           control points.
CW - Abbreviation for Civil War (1861-1865); also called War of the Rebellion
     or War between the States.
d. - Abbreviation for died.
DAF - Abbreviation for Described as follows.
dau. - Abbreviation for daughter.
Daughter-in-Law - Wife of one's son. Daughter-in-law also used to mean
                  "step-daughter."
dec'd - Abbreviation for deceased.
Deceased - Dead.
Decedent - A deceased person.
Declaration of Intention - First paper, sworn to and filed in court, by an
                           alien stating that he wants to be come a citizen.
                           It could also be a declaration filed by a couple in
                           a local court, indicating their intention to marry.
Declination - The difference between magnetic north and geographic (true)
              north. Surveyors used a compass to determine the direction
              of survey lines. Compasses point to magnetic north, rather
              than true north. This declination error is measured in
              degrees, and can range from a few degrees to ten degrees or
              more. Surveyors may have been instructed to correct their
              surveys by a particular declination value. The value of
              declination at any point on the earth is constantly changing
              because the location of magnetic north is drifting. More
              information about historical values of declination is available.
Deed - A conveyence of property from one person to another in writing,
       signed by the grantor (seller). The legal document that is signed
       and sealed and delivered to effect a transfer of property. A deed is
       the evidence of legal right to possess property. Early deeds may be
       on paper or parchment and generally were required to be signed and
       also sealed [stamped seal]. They indicated some form of conveyance,
       transfer, contract or bargain, generally involving real estate.
Deed of trust - A transfer of property to someone to be held in trust for
                another. See trust. More specifically, however, deeds of
                trust are used in a number of states instead of a mortgage
                to secure a loan. The deed of trust names the trustees in
                whom title is placed as security against failure to meet
                the terms of the loan.
Deed poll - A deed not indented, that is, a deed made by one party only. See
            indenture.
Deforce - To forcibly withhold property from its rightful owner.
Demesne - 1) Possession of land as one's own. 2) The part of an estate
          worked for the owner. 3) Land adjoining the manor house.
Demise - Generally a synonym for 'lease', both noun and verb.
Deposition - A testifying or testimony taken down in writing under oath of
             affirmation in reply to interrogatories, before a competent
             officer to replace to oral testimony of a witness.
Descendant - Your descendants are your children, grandchildren,
             great-grandchildren, and so on -- anyone to whom you are
             an ancestor.
Devise - Gift of real property by will.
Devisee - One to whom real property (land) is given in a will.
Devisor - One who gives real property in a will.
Direct Line - Line of decent traced through persons who are related to one
              another as a child and parent.
Directories - Directories come in all types: city, telephone, county,
              regional, professional, religious, post office, street,
              ethnic, and school. The directories you search will depend on
              the type of information you know about the individual. The
              information that you can find in a directory depends on the
              type of directory. For example, city directories normally list
              names and addresses. In some city directories you can also
              find information such as children's names, marriage dates,
              death dates, and birth dates. Other types of directories may
              provide you with even more interesting information about
              your ancestors. For instance, a church directory may tell
              you about an individual's involvement in church activities,
              professional directories may give you insight into your
              ancestor's professional life, and club directories may
              contain information about your ancestor's involvement in
              social activities.
Dissenter - One who did not belong to the established church, especially
            the Church of England in the American colonies.
Distrain - To take, as a pledge, property of another and keep it until he
           performs his obligation or until the property is taken by the
           sheriff. See also Foreclose, Replevin.
District Land Office Plat Book - Books or rather maps which show the location
                                 of the land patentee.
District Land Office Tract Book - Books which list individual entries by
                                  range and township.
div. - Abbreviation for divorced.
Dividend - The share allotted to each of several persons entitled to part
           of a division of profits or property.
Division - see Partition.
Dogwood - a type of tree.
Double Dating - A system of double dating used in England and America from
                1582-1752 because it was not clear as to whether the year
                commenced 1 Jan or 25 Mar.
Double nickel - Slang for .55, as in 6-double nickel (6.55).
DOV - Abbreviation for Declaration of Value (real estate transfer tax
      declaration).
Dowager - Widow holding property or a title received from her deceased
          husband; title given in England to widows of princes, dukes,
          earls, and other noblemen.
Dower - Legal provision of real estate and support made to the widow for
        her lifetime from a husband's estate.
Download - Downloading is electronically extracting files from a network
           or bulletin board system for use on your own computer. Many
           bulletin board systems with genealogy sections have files that
           you can download.
Dowry (also dowery) - Land, money, goods, or personal property brought by
                      a bride to her husband in marriage.
Drain - Small dry stream or gully.
Draughts of - (pronounced drafts). See waters of.
Drean - See drain.
Dwr Rls - Abbreviation for Dower Release.
Easement - (or Right-of-Way) The right of one person or body to use the
           land of another person for a special purpose.
Ejectment - A legal action to recover possession of land as well as damages
            resulting from not being able to possess it. See also Eviction,
            Richard Roe, Trespass.
Elder - a type of tree.
Elm - a type of tree.
Emancipated - Freed from slavery; freed from parents' control; of legal age.
Emigrant - One leaving a country and moving to another.
Emigration - Emigration is when an individual leaves their home country to
             live in another country.
Emolument - Profit derived from employment or labor, including wages and
            other compensation.
Encroachment - To gain unlawfully or infringe on the property of another.
Encumbrance - A burden on a property, generally one that affects the ability
              to transfer title, or one which affects the condition of the
              property. Examples are liens, mortgages, taxes, easements,
              water rights, etc.
Enfeoff - To make a gift of tangible inherited property; to invest with a
          property or fee.
Enfeoffment - Giving ownership in fee. A deed or legal document giving
              ownership in fee.
Engineer's Chain - A 100-foot chain containing 100 links of one foot apiece.
Entail - To entail is to restrict the inheritance of land to a specific
         group of heirs, such as an individual's sons.
Entry - Also called a claim, application or petition. Following the warrant,
        an entry is made in the county surveyor's book. This does not
        necessarily mean that the Secretary of State has a record of the
        entry, as the process is preliminary.
Enumeration - Listing or counting, such as a census.
Epitaph - An inscription on or at a tomb or grave in memory of the one
          buried there.
Equity - The monetary value of a property beyond any mortgage debt or
         liabilities existing on it.
Escheats - Refers to the lands that may not be re-patented when a patentee
           dies without heirs (or is convicted of a crime). The land is
           said to "escheat." The land may be reverted to the state.
Esse - In esse (Latin). In existence. See also posse.
Estate - All property and debts belonging to a person.
Et Al - Latin for "and others".
Et Cetera - (abbreviated etc. or &c) Latin for "and the rest"; used in land
            records to omit lengthy and/or repeated legal text, well-known
            titles of honor, and so on.
Et Ux - Latin for "and wife".
Et Uxor - And his wife. Sometimes written simply Et Ux.
Eviction - The act of dispossessing a person of lands (in pursuance of a
           court judgment).
Evidence - Any kind of proof, such as testimony, documents, records,
           certificates, material objects, etc.
Exception - A clause in a deed whereby the seller retains some right currently
            held on the land being sold, for example, "my land except 3
            acres...", "my land except mineral rights...". In both cases
            the seller owned the thing being excepted. See also Reservation.
Exception and Reservation - A general term found in deeds when a
                            seller retains some kind of interest in the
                            property. Technically the language should refer
                            to a reservation or exception as needed but
                            many deeds are written with this catchall phrase.
exec. - Abbreviation for executor.
Executor - Male appointed in a will to carry out its provisions.
Executrix - Female executor.
exor. - Abbreviation for executor.
exox. - Abbreviation for executrix.
Extract - Summary of important points of a given text, especially deeds
          and wills.
Fallow Land - Barren or unproductive land; land plowed but not sown or left
              uncultivated/untilled for a year or more.
fam. - Abbreviation for family.
Family Group Sheet - A family group sheet is a form which presents
                     genealogical information about a nuclear family --
                     a husband, a wife, and their children. A family group
                     sheet usually includes birth dates and places, death
                     dates and places, and marriage dates and places. Family
                     Tree Maker for Windows can help you create family
                     group sheets for your family.
Family Histories/Genealogies - Family histories and genealogies are books
                               which detail the basic genealogical facts about
                               one or more generations of a particular family.
Family Pedigrees - In general, family pedigrees refer to family group sheets
                   that are linked in a computer system. When you access an
                   individual's family group sheet in a linked pedigree,
                   you also access all of the records that are linked to
                   that individual.
FamilySearch - You can find FamilySearch computers at the Family History
               Library of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints or
               at one of the branch Family History Centers. The FamilySearch
               computer contains several databases of information: the Social
               Security Death Index, the Military Index, the Ancestral
               File, and the International Genealogical Index. You can
               use these resources to search for information about your
               family members right on the computer. You can also use the
               FamilySearch computer to look up items in the Family History
               Library Catalog. Because of the popularity of the FamilySearch
               computer, many Family History Centers require you to sign up
               for a time slot in advance. FamilySearch is also now available
               on the Internet through the Web site of the LDS Church.
Father-in-Law - Father of one's spouse.
Fathom - Typically a nautical measure of six feet in length; however,
         occasionally used as a land measurement meaning a square fathom
         or thirty-six square feet.
Fee - An estate of inheritance in land, being either fee simple or fee
      tail. An estate in land held of a feudal lord on condition of the
      performing of certain services.
Fee Simple - An absolute ownership without restriction.
Fee Tail - An estate of inheritance limited to lineal descendant heirs of
           a person to whom it was granted.
Fem Covert - A married woman.
Feme - Female, woman, or wife.
Feme Sole - Unmarried woman or a married woman with property independent
            of her husband.
Feoff - See fee
Feoffment - Transfer of inheritable real property.
Feoffee - One who benefits from a fief.
Feud - See fee.
Feudal system - The system of land holding in exchange for service,
                ultimately to the king. This is opposed to the alodial system.
Fief - See fee.
Fieri Facias - A common law writ to enforce collection of a debt. Typically
               executed by the sheriff, the property of the debtor is sold
               to satisfy the claim.
Fi Fa - Abbreviation for Fieri facias.
Fir - a type of tree.
First station - See Point of Beginning
Flag - A bright plastic ribbon tied to a lath stake. Used to mark points
       along a survey line.
Ford - Shallow part of a stream or river where one could cross.
Forfeiture - Loss of property for failure to obey the law, or reversion of
             title to the sovereign because of default or an offense. It
             can be applied to any part of an interest of ownership. See
             also escheat.
Fork - Meeting point of two streams. "In the fork of" means between two
       branches.
Fortnight - Two weeks.
FR - Abbreviation for family register.
Franchise - A special privilege conferred by the government (on an individual
            or corporation) which does not belong to citizens generally in
            the common right. See also Patent.
Franklin, State of - An area once known but never officially recognized
                     and was under consideration from 1784 - 1788 from the
                     western part of North Carolina.
Fraternity - Group of men (or women) sharing a common purpose or interest.
Freedman - Male released from slavery; emancipated person.
Freehold - An estate in fee simple, in fee tail, or for life.
Freeholder - Originally, a person having title to real property or a
             specified number of acres.
Freeman - Male of legal age with the right to vote, own land and practice
          a trade.
Free Man of Color - Black man who was free from birth or later in life.
Friend - Member of the Religious Society of Friends; a Quaker.
Full Age - Age of majority; legal age; adult (legal age varied according
           to place and current law).
Furlong - See measurements.
Gambrel oak - see Oakbrush.
Gazetteer - A geographical dictionary; a book giving names and descriptions
            of places usually in alphabetical order.
gdn. - Abbreviation for guardian.
GEDCOM - A standard file format for exchanging information between
         genealogy programs. The acronym GEDCOM stands for GEnealogical
         Data COMmunications. The Family History Department of the Church
         of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) developed the
         GEDCOM standard. Most genealogy software programs will export family
         information in GEDCOM format. You can contribute your GEDCOM file
         to the World Family Tree Project either on diskette or online.
Genealogy - Study of family history and descent.
Gentleman - A man well born.
Ginney - A wooden dowel 6-9 inches in length with a sharpened end. Set in
         the ground to mark survey points.
Given Name - Name given to a person at birth or baptism, one's first and
             middle names.
Glebe - Land belonging to a parish church.
Good Brother - Brother-in-law.
Good Sister - Sister-in-law.
Good Son - Son-in-law.
Gore - In old English law, a small, narrow strip of land. Modern usage
       applies to small, triangular pieces of land such as may be left
       between surveys and boundary lines which do not meet/close.
Governor's Grant - The finalizing of a patent when the document is signed
                   by the governor and the secretary of state.
Grandam - Grandmother.
Grant - Transfer of title from the government to the first titleholder of
        a piece of property. This term is generally used by states and the
        federal government. See also patent.
Grantee - One who buys property or receives a grant.
Grantee Index - Master index of persons purchasing, buying or receiving
                property.
Grantor - One who sells property or makes a grant.
Grantor Index - Master index of persons selling, granting, transferring or
                conveying property.
grdn. - Abbreviation for guardian.
Great-Aunt - Sister of one's grandparent
Great-Uncle - Brother of one's grandparent.
Gregorian Calendar - Currently used calendar. The changeover from the
                     Julian Calendar officially occurred in 1582 (however,
                     in reality the changeover was made at different times
                     in different parts of the world).
Ground - A unit of area equal to 2400 sq. ft., or 220 sq. meters, used
         in India.
Guardian - Person appointed to care for and manage property of a minor
           orphan or an adult incompetent of managing his own affairs.
Gum - subtypes: black, sweet.
Gunter's Chain - See measurements.
Gut - A narrow passage between hills. A stream in such a passage. A drain.
Habendum - The portion of a land conveyance beginning with the words "To
           have and to hold ...," being the language that defines the extent
           of the ownership of the property.
Hackberry - has cherry-like fruit.
Half Brother/Half Sister - Child by another marriage of one's mother or
                           father; the relationship of two people who have
                           only one parent in common.
Hawkings - Business or peddling rights belonging to a property.
Hawthorn - a type of tree.
Hazel - a type of tree.
Head - The source of a stream.
Headlands - see Upland.
Headright - A grant of property given in fulfillment of certain conditions
            relating especially to settlement and developing land.
Headwaters - The smallest streams that combine to make a larger stream.
Hectare - See measurements.
Heir Apparent - By law a person whose right of inheritance is established,
                provided he or she outlives the ancestor, see also
                primogeniture.
Heirs - Those entitled by law or by the terms of a will to inherit property
        from another.
Hemlock - a type of tree.
Hereditament - Something inherited or capable of being inherited. See also
               Inheritance, Legacy.
Hickory, hiccory, hickry - has edible nuts and hard wood.
Hide - A very old English unit of area, a hide was of variable size depending
       on locale and the quality of the land. It was the amount of land to
       support a family, and ranged from 60 to 180 acres. After the Norman
       conquest in 1066 it became standardized at around 120 acres.
Highways - see Allowances.
Holographic Will - A holographic or olographic will is handwritten and
                   signed by the individual that the will belongs to.
Homestead - A homestead usually is a home on land obtained from the United
            States government. Part of the agreement between the individual
            and the government was that the individual had to live on the
            land and make improvements to it, such as adding buildings and
            clearing fields.
Homestead Act - Law passed by Congress in 1862 allowing a head of a family
                to obtain title to 160 acres of public land after clearing
                and improving it for 5 years.
hon. - Abbreviation for honorable.
Hornbeam - has hard, heavy wood.
Hours - Degrees
Houselot - (or Homelot) A property containing a dwelling house, typically
           within a town settlement, as compared to outlying meadow.
           See also Messuage.
Hub and Tack - A 2" by 2" stake that is set in the ground and that contains
               a nail ("tack") that precisely marks the point being set.
Huguenot - A French Protestant in the 16th and 17th centuries. One of
           the reformed or calvinistic communion who were driven by the
           thousands into exile in England, Holland, Germany and America.
Hundred - An adminstrative area larger than a village and smaller than a
          county. In England it was 100 hides in size, and the term was
          used for early settlements in Virginia, Maryland and Delaware.
Huntings - Hunting rights belonging to a property.
husb. - Abbreviation for husband. 
Husbandman - A farmer; originally a tenant who cultivates leased ground.
Illegitimate - Born to a mother who was not married to the child's father.
Immigrant - One moving into a country from another.
Immigration - Immigration is when an individual goes into a new country
              to live.
imp. - Abbreviation for imported.
Importation right - See headright.
Improve - To make land more valuable by clearing and planting. Land that
          was not improved by the owner might revert to the government.
Improved Land - Land used for the purpose of husbandry whether tillage,
                meadow or pasture.
In capite - Latin - An estate in land held by direct grant of the king.
Incumbrance - See encumbrance.
Indefeasible Estate - An estate that cannot be changed under any
                      circumstances.
Indenture - Today it means a contract in 2 or more copies.  Originally made
            in 2 parts by cutting or tearing a single sheet across the
            middle in a jagged line so the two parts may later be matched.
Indentured Servant - One who bound himself into service of another person
                     for a specified number of years, often in return for
                     transportation to this country.
Index - In genealogical terms, an index is an alphabetical list of names
        that were taken from a particular set of records. For example, a
        census record index lists the names of individuals that are found
        in a particular set of census records. Indexes mostly come in book
        form, but you can also find them on CD-ROM, microfilm, and microfiche.
inf. - Abbreviation for Infantry.
Infant - Any person not of full age; a minor.
Ingress and Egress - The entering and leaving of land and the means of
                     doing so.
inhab - Abbreviation for inhabitant; inhabited.
Inheritance - Something that has descended to an heir, whether by will or
              otherwise. See also Hereditament, Legacy.
in loco parentis - In the stead of one or both parents.
In personam - Latin - A legal action against a person.
In rem - Latin - A legal action to affect the interests of people in a thing
         such as a parcel of land. Examples would be partitioning an estate
         or foreclosing. See also in personam.
Inst - Abbreviation for instant.
Instant - Of or pertaining to the current month.
Intangible property - The opposite of tangible property. Examples are
                      property rights, easements, copyrights and other
                      things of value that have no physical presence. Also,
                      certificates or other items that have no inherent
                      value but which represent something physical.
International Genealogical Index - The International Genealogical Index (IGI)
                                   is one of the resources of the Family
                                   History Library of the Church of Jesus
                                   Christ of Latter-day Saints. Containing
                                   approximately 250 million names, it is
                                   an index of people's names that were
                                   either submitted to the church, or were
                                   extracted from records that the church
                                   has microfilmed over the years. You can
                                   use the IGI to locate information about
                                   your ancestors.
Intestate - One who dies without a will or dying without a will.
Instrument - Legal document.
Inventory - An account, catalog or schedule, made by an executor or
            administrator of all the goods and chattels and sometimes of
            the real estate of a deceased person.
Investiture - See livery of seizin.
Ironwood - see hornbeam.
Issue - Offspring; children; lineal descendants of a common ancestor.
Jno - Abbreviation for John or Johannes.
John Doe - (or John Den, John Stiles, Richard Roe, Richard Fen, Richard
           Miles) Fictitious names used to represent unknown persons
           in legal proceedings for the purpose of making argument or
           illustration. Often used in ejectment cases when the plaintiff's
           lessee or other party is unknown or uncertain.
Joiner - Carpenter who does finish work.
Joint Tenancy - see Tenancy.
Jointure - Property given to a prospective wife, to be enjoyed by her at
           her husband's death. Differs from dower in the way in which her
           future is protected.
jud. - Abbreviation for judicial.
Julian Calendar - Calendar named for Julius Caesar and used from 45 B.C. to
                  1582, called the "Old Style" calendar; replaced by the
                  Gregorian Calendar (the changeover to the Gregorian
                  Calendar was made at different times in different parts
                  of the world).
Juniper - a type of tree.
Junr. - Abbreviation for junior.
Juvenis - Juvenile, minor, under legal age. 
Kill - Dutch for small river or creek.
King's Highwats - see Allowances.
Knave - Servant boy.
knt. - Abbreviation for knight. 
Labor - The labor is a unit of area used in Mexico and Texas. In Texas it
        equals 177.14 acres (or 1 million square varas).
Land Records - Land records are deeds -- proof that a piece of land is owned
               by a particular individual. The information you receive from
               the records will vary, but you will at least get a name,
               the location of the property, and the period of ownership.
Land Warrant - see Warrant.
Landmark - A survey mark made on a 'permanent' feature of the land such as
           a tree, pile of stones, etc.
L & R - Abbreviation for Lease and Release.
Larch - a type of tree.
Late - Recently deceased; sometimes used to show an individual no longer
       lives in the location named.
Laurel - a type of tree.
League (legua) - Unit of area used in the southwest U.S., equal to 25 labors,
                 or 4428 acres (Texas), or 4439 acres (California). Also,
                 a unit of length-- approximately three miles.
Lease - An agreement which creates a landlord - tenant situation.
Lease and Release - A practice in early Virginia that is equivalent to
                    a sale. It was accomplished by a two step process of
                    leasing the property in question to the buyer, then
                    releasing the buyer of the lease obligation.
Legacy - Property or money left to someone in a will.
Legatee - The person to whom a legacy is given. A residuary legatee inherits
          the residue or remainder of an estate after all other legacies
          are disposed of.
Legislature - Lawmaking branch of state or national government; elected
              group of lawmakers.
Lessee - The person (tenant) to whom a lease is made.
Lessor - The person who grants a lease; i.e., the owner of the property
         (landlord).
Letters of Administration - (or Letters Testamentary, sometimes Letters
                            Testimonial) Legal papers granted by a court
                            to either the Administrator or Executor of an
                            estate, respectively.
Liber - Book of public records.
lic. - Abbreviation for license.
License - A grant of permission, e.g. to pursue a business. The term is also
          occasionally used in early New Jersey land records relative to
          permission to make a purchase, including a purchase of territory
          from the Indians.
Lien - A claim against property as security for payment of a debt.
Life Rights - (or Life Estate) Property ownership whose duration is limited
              to the natural life of the party holding it.
Lightwood - highly resinous pine, suitable for stakes.
Lineage - Ancestry; direct descent from a specific ancestor.
Lineal - Consisting of or being in as direct line of ancestry or descendants;
         descended in a direct line.
Line Tree - Any tree that is on a property line, specifically one that is
            also a corner to another property. Meander - "with the meanders
            of the stream" means the survey line follow the twists and
            turns of the stream.
Link - See measurements.
Lis Pendens - Pending court action; usually applies to land title claims.
Litigant - Person involved in a lawsuit.
liv. - Abbreviation for living.
Live oak - a type of tree.
Livery - Delivery of ownership.
Livery of Seizin - An open and 'notorious' public ceremony conferring
                   ownership of a freehold estate.
Local History - A local history is usually a book about a particular town
                or county. Local histories were quite popular in the late
                19th century. While they often give the history of the
                development of the area, they usually also include some
                information about the important families that lived there.
Locator - A person who determines or establishes the boundaries of land or
          a mining claim.
Loco Parentis - In place of the parent or parents.
Lodge - A chapter or meeting hall of a fraternal organization.
Lower - Toward the mouth of a stream. Further down along its course. Opposite
        of upper.
Lowerwood - transcription error for sourwood.
Loyalist - Tory, an American colonist who supported the British side during
           the American Revolution.
ltd. - Abbreviation for limited. 
m. - Abbreviation for married.
Magnolia - a type of tree.
Maiden Name - A girl's last name or surname before she marries.
Major - Person who has reached legal age.
Majores - Ancestors.
Majority - Legal age.
Manse - Parsonage; enough land to support a family.
Manucaptor - (or Mainpernor) A person obligated to appear (in court) on
             behalf of someone under arrest. Similar to bail.
Manumission - Manumission is the act of being released from slavery or
              servitude.
Manuscript - A composition written with the hand as an ancient book or an
             un-printed modern book or music.
Maple, (maypole) - a type of tree.
Marita - Married woman, wife.
Maritus - Bridegroom, married man.
Marriage Bond - A financial guarantee that no impediment to the marriage
                existed, furnished by the intended bridegroom or by his
                friends.
Marriage Contract - Legal agreement between prospective spouses made before
                    marriage to determine their property rights and those
                    of their children.
Marriage Records - A marriage record contains information about a marriage
                   between two individuals. On a marriage record, you can
                   at least find the bride's and groom's full names, the
                   date of the marriage, and county where the marriage took
                   place. Many marriage records include other information,
                   such as the names and birthplaces of the bride's and
                   groom's parents, the addresses of the bride and groom,
                   information about previous marriages, and the names of
                   the witnesses to the marriage.
Marsh - (sometimes "Marrish") An area of low-lying wet land.
Maternal - Related through one's mother, such as a Maternal grandmother
           being the mother's mother.
Maternal Line - Line of descent traced through the mother's ancestry.
Matron - Older married woman with children.
md. - Abbreviation for married.
Meadow - (or Lowland) A tract of low or level land yielding grasses which
         are good for hay. See also Upland.
Meander - "with the meanders of the stream" means the survey line follows
          the twists and turns of the stream.
Measurements - Acre - 43,560 square ft or 160 square rods or 10 square chains
                 (the Scottish acre is 1.27 English acres).
               Chain - 100 Links or 66 feet (usually understood to be Gunter's
                 chain, but possibly variant by locale; Chains equal to 2
                 poles (one half the standard length) are found in Virginia;
                 the name comes form the heavy metal chain of 100 links
                 that was used by surveyors to measure property bounds).
               Furlong - 1000 Links or 660 feet.
               Gunter's Chain - Unit of length equal to 66 feet, or 4
                 Poles. This unit was apparently defined as one tenth of a
                 furlong, a common unit of length in previous times. The mile
                 was redefined from 5000 feet to 5280 feet in order to be
                 an even multiple of furlongs. A mile is basically 80 chains.
               Hectare - Metric unit of area equal to 10,000 square meters,
                 or 2.471 acres.
               Link - 1/100 chain (7.92 inches).
               Morgen - A German and Dutch measure of land equating to
                 roughly two English acres; used frequently in the Bergen
                 settlement in East Jersey.
               Out - Ten chains. When counting out lines, the chain carriers
                 would put a stake at the end of a chain, move the chain
                 and put a stake at the end, and so on until they ran
                 "out of ten stakes.
               Perch - Same as Rod.
               Pole - Same as Rod.
               Rod - 16.5 feet (or 5.5 yards).
               Rood - From 5 1/2 yards to 8 yards, depending on locality.
               Square Mile - 640 acres.
Mensis - Month.
Merestone - A stone that marks a boundary. See monument.
Meridian - In the U.S. public land surveying system, a surveyed north-south
           (i.e. longitudinal) reference line, often hundrends of miles in
           length, from which ranges are surveyed to the east and west. There
           are approximately two dozen meridians in the lower 48 states. See
           also baseline.
Messuage - A dwelling house.
Metes - Measurements of distance in feet, rods, poles, chains, etc.;
        pertains to measuring direction and distance.
Metes and Bounds Survey Method - A system of surveying used by the original
                                 13 colonies and later by Maine, Vermont,
                                 Tennessee, Kentucky, Texas, West Virginia
                                 and some of Ohio. The system requires
                                 specific description regarding the survey
                                 lines, the natural features, and the names
                                 of owners of any adjoining property.
Microfiche - Sheet of microfilm with greatly reduced images of pages of
             documents.
Microfilm - Reproduction of documents on film at reduced size.
Migrant - Person who moves from place to place, usually in search of work.
Migrate - To move from one country or state or region to another. (Noun :
          migration)
mil. - Abbreviation for military.
Military Records - The US government has always kept records on all military
                   and civilian workers. Most of these files have very
                   detailed information, such as the individual's name, their
                   spouse's name, date of birth, place of residence, which
                   wars the individual served in, their military organization
                   (Navy, Marines, or Army), when the individual's service
                   began and ended, where and when the individual died,
                   and where the individual was buried.
Militia - Citizens of a state who are not part of the national military
          forces but who can be called into military service in an emergency;
          a citizen army, apart from the regular military forces.
Minor - One who is under legal age; not yet a legal adult.
Mislocation - see Certificate of Mislocation.

Mister - In early times, a title of respect given only to those who held
         important civil officer or who were of gentle blood.
mo. - Abbreviation for month.
Moiety - A half; an indefinite portion.
MOL - Abbreviation for More or less.
Monstrans de droit - A claim of right to property, grounded in fact.
Monument - A permanently placed survey marker such as a stone shaft sunk
           into the ground.
More or less - This term is frequently used in deeds to qualify acreage,
               e.g. "50 acres, being the same more or less". Even accurate
               surveys have some error in the calculation of area and this
               phrase recognizes that fact.
Morgen - Unit of area equal to about .6309 acres. It was used in Germany,
         Holland and South Africa, and was derived from the German word
         Morgen ("morning"). It represented the amount of land that could
         be plowed in a morning.
Mortality - Death; death rate.
Mortality Schedules - Enumeration of persons who died during the year prior
                      to June 1 of 1850, 1860, 1870, and 1880 in each state
                      of the United States, conducted by the bureau of census.
Mortgage - A conditional transfer of title to real property as security
           for payment of a debt.
Mortgagee - The person who takes or receives a mortgage; i.e., the one who
            is granted temporary/partial ownership of the property until
            the terms are met.
Mortgagor - The person who, having all or some part of the title to a
            property, by written instrument pledges that property for some
            particular purpose (e.g., to borrow money).
Mother-in-Law - Mother of one's spouse.
Mountain birch - a type of tree.
Mouth - The place where a stream enters another, larger stream.
Mulatto - A mulatto is legally considered to be an individual with mixed
          black and white heritage. However, some individuals who were
          designated mulattos may have a slightly more mixed parentage,
          perhaps including Native American blood.
Mutation - In India, the process of legally changing a parcel's owner. It
           results in an updated RTC (Record of Right Tenancy and
           Cultivation), the backbone of the Indian land record system.
na. - Abbreviation for Naturalized; not applicable.
Namesake - Person named after another person.
Narrows - Narrow part of a stream.
Naturalization Records - Naturalization records document the process by which
                         an immigrant becomes a citizen. An individual has to
                         live in the United States for a specific period of
                         time and file a series of forms with a court before
                         he or she can become naturalized. Naturalization
                         records provide the following information: place
                         and date of birth, date of arrival into the
                         United States, place of residence at the time
                         of naturalization, a personal description, and
                         sometimes the name of the ship that the individual
                         arrived on and the individual's occupation.
natus - Born.
n.d. - Abbreviation for no date; not dated.
Neck - A narrow stretch of land (as an isthmus, cape, promontory or mountain
       pass); also, a narrow body of water between two larger bodies, i.e.,
       a strait.
Necrology - Listing or record of persons who have died recently.
Nee - Used to identify a woman's maiden name; born with the surname of.
neph. - Abbreviation for nephew.
Nephew - Son of one's brother or sister.
Newspaper Announcements - Normally, newspapers announce events of genealogical
                          interest such as births, deaths, and marriages. The
                          amount of information in these announcements will
                          vary. Most likely you will find the names of the
                          individuals involved in the event, the date of the
                          event, and where the event took place. Sometimes
                          you can even find pictures.
Niece - Daughter of one's brother or sister.
n.p. - Abbreviation for no place listed; no publisher listed.
nunc. - Abbreviation for nuncupative will, oral will.
Noncupative Will - One declared or dictated by the testator, usually for
                   persons in last sickness, sudden illness, or military.
Oak, (oake) - subtypes: black, box, chestnut, live, pin, post, red, scrub,
              shrub, Spanish, swamp white, white.
Oakbrush - scrub oak prevalent in southern Colorado west of the divide.
ob. - Abbreviation for obit, deceased,
OB - Abbreviation for order book, as in court order book.
obiit. - Abbreviation for he or she died.
obit. - Abbreviation for obituary.
Octoroon - Child of a quadroon; person having one-eighth black ancestry.
Of Color - Black, Indian, persons of mixed blood.
Old Dominion - Virginia.
Old Style Calendar - Julian calendar, used before the Gregorian calendar.
Olographic Will - An olographic or holographic will is handwritten and
                  signed by the individual that the will belongs to.
Open line - A survey line, usually the final one, that is not measured and
            marked (blazed) by the surveyor but is instead calculated.
Oral History - An oral history is a collection of family stories told by a
               member of the family or by a close family friend. Normally,
               an oral history is transcribed onto paper, or is video or
               tape recorded. Oral histories can yield some of the best
               information about a family -- the kinds of things that you
               won't find written in records.
Oral Will - Nuncupative will - oral will declared or dictated by the testator
            in his last sickness before a sufficient number of witnesses
            and afterwards put in writing.
Order - A directive from a court or other authority to perform an action
        (e.g., a directive from a proprietary board to issue a dividend or
        grant a warrant).
Ordinary - A judicial officer with powers in regard to wills, probate,
           administration, guardianship, etc. In colonial New Jersey, the
           governor was called the Ordinary General. An ordinary also means a
           tavern or eating house where regular meals are served.
Orphan - Child whose parents are dead; sometimes, a child who has lost one
         parent by death.
Orphan Assylum - An orphanage.
Orphan's Court - Orphans being recognized as wards of the states, provisions
                 were made for them in special courts.
OS - Old style calendar. 
Out - See measurements.
Palatinate - Area in Germany known as the Pfalz, Rheinland Pfalz and
             Bavarian Pfalz from which thousands of families immigrated to
             colonial America.
Paleography - Study of handwriting.
Parcel - A piece of land. A tract.
Parent County - The county from which a new county is formed.
Parish - Ecclesiastical division or jurisdiction; the site of a church.
Partition - (or Division) The dividing of land held by joint tenants
            (owners) so that they may hold and dispose of their respective
            parts separately. "Partition" is typically used to refer to a
            voluntary, not mandated, dividing of property whereas "division"
            is more frequently used to refer to a parceling of property by
            commissioners appointed by a court. However, the two terms are
            often used interchangeably.
Passenger List - A ships list of passengers, usually referring to those
                 ships arriving in the US from Europe.
Pasture - Ground for the grazing of domestic animals, and including the
          grass growing upon it.
Patent - "Patenting" is the formal issuance and the recording of a land
         title from one entity to another or to a group of individuals. To
         create a patent required four steps: First, the individual who
         sought to create a patent found the land to be included in the
         patent and filled out an application to an entry taker. Second,
         the warrant was delivered to Claims Court where a survey was
         taken of the land to locate prominent landmarks, such as rivers or
         mountains. Third, the surveyor formalized the broad outlines of the
         patent by adding specific length directions (in poles and chains)
         from one landmark to another, and created his own, more specific
         map that showed the exact boundaries of the patent. Fourth, the
         prospective landowner paid a flat fee to the state for creating
         the patent, as well as a per-acre fee that depended upon the size
         of the patent. Upon receipt of the fees, copies were made of the
         patent and its map (plat) for the county and state secretary's
         office. After acknowledging the patent fees, the map and deed of
         ownership were issued to the landowner.
Paternal - Related to one's father. Paternal grandmother is the father's
           mother.
Paternal Line - Line of descent traced through the father's ancestry.
Patriot - One who loves his country and supports its interests.
Patronymics - Patronymics is the practice of creating last names from the
              name of one's father. For example, Robert, John's son, would
              become Robert Johnson. Robert Johnson's son Neil would become
              Neil Robertson.
Patroon - The proprietors of certain manors established in the Dutch colony
          of New Netherland.
Pawpaw - a type of tree.
Payoff Deed - In Arizona and perhaps elsewhere, a deed of ownership issued
              when seller receives full payment under the terms of a deed
              of trust or agreement of sale.
Pedigree - Family tree; ancestry.
Pedigree Chart - A chart showing a person's ancestry.
Pension - Money paid regularly to an individual, especially by a government
          as reward for military service during wartime or upon retirement
          from government service.
Pensioner - Person who receives pension benefits.
Perch - See measurements.
Persimmon - has plum-like fruit.
Per Stirpes - The standard method of inheritance and division of property,
              meaning "by root or stock," whereby the shares of the
              heirs are based on the share which a predeceased ancestor
              (typically parent) would have inherited as compared to equal
              division among living heirs. In other words, if a property is
              bequeathed to four children and one dies, the heirs of the
              deceased child divide a fourth part as opposed to having a
              share equal to the three heirs in the older generation.
P/F - Abbreviation for per following.
Pine - a type of tree.
Pin oak - a type of tree.
Plantation - A large cultivated estate.
Planter - A farmer; owner of a plantation.
Planting and Seating - See improve. In Virginia colonial law a patentee
                       was required to cultivate an acre of land and build
                       a small house on the property, otherwise the patent
                       would revert to the government.
Plat - A drawing of a parcel of land. More specifically, the drawing
       created by the surveyor that shows the field work, with bearings,
       distances, etc.
Plot plan - A diagram showing the proposed or existing use of a specific
            parcel of land.
Plunge - 1) Inversion of a transit in order to make measurements that cancel
         errors in the transit, or to extend a line over an obstacle. 2)
         The angle a falling line makes with the horizontal.
P.O. - Abbreviation for Post Oak, which is used extensively within the
       surveys as a marker or point of reference.
p.o.a. - Abbreviation for power of attorney.
P of A - Abbreviation for Power of Attorney.
Pohiccory - see hickory.
Point - A point of the compass. There are four cardinal points (North, South,
        East, West), and 28 others yielding 32 points of 11.25 degrees each. A
        survey line's direction could be described as a compass point,
        as in "NNE" (north northeast). To improve precision, the points
        would be further subdivided into halves or quarters as necessary,
        for example, "NE by North, one quarter point North". In some areas,
        "and by" meant one half point, as in "NE and by North".
Point of Beginning - The starting point of the survey.
Point of intersection - The point where two non-parallel lines intersect. More
                        specifically, the point where two tangents to a
                        curved line intersect.
Pole - See measurements.
Poll - List or record of persons, especially for taxing or voting.
Ponderosa pine - a type of tree.
Poplar, popular - a type of tree.
Posse - In posse (Latin). In the future or which might exist in the
        future. See also esse.
Possessory - Relating to ownership.
Post - Latin prefix meaning after, as in post-war economy.
Post oak - wood used for posts.
Posterity - Descendants; those who come after.
Posthumous - A child born after the death of the father.
Power of Attorney - When a person in unable to act for himself, he appoints
                    another to act in his behalf.
pr. - Abbreviation for proved, probated.
p.r. - Abbreviation for parish register.
Pre - Latin prefix meaning before, as in pre-war military build-up.
Pre-Emotion Rights - Right given by the federal government to citizens to
                     buy a quarter section of land or less.
Premises - A somewhat fluid term meaning land and its appurtenances, or
           land and its buildings and structures.
Preponderance of Evidence - Evidence of greater weight or more convincing than
                            the opposing evidence; evidence more credible
                            and convincing, more reasonable and probable,
                            and can be circumstantial in nature.
Primary Evidence - Original or first-hand evidence; the best evidence
                   available that must be used before secondary evidence
                   can be introduced as proof.
Primary Source - Primary sources are records that were created at the time
                 of an event. For example, a primary source for a birth date
                 would be a birth certificate. While you can find birth
                 dates on other documents, such as marriage certificates,
                 they would not be primary sources for the birth date,
                 because they were not created at the time of the birth.
Primogeniture - Insures the right of the eldest son to inherit the entire
                estate of his parents, to the exclusion of younger sons.
Private Road Maintenance Agreement - An agreement between all property
                                     owners that abut a private road to
                                     maintain that road. Lenders require
                                     this agreement if the private road is
                                     the only access to a property.
Privity - A relationship between parties having a direct or indirect interest
          in a legal matter. Class actions are an example where parties not
          involved in a suit have a privity relation to it. Parties in estate
          transactions necessarily have privity, and so do heirs of an estate.
prob. - Abbreviation for probably; probated.
Probate - Legal process used to determine the validity of a will before
          the court authorizes distribution of an estate; legal process
          used to appoint someone to administer the estate of someone who
          died without leaving a will.
Probate Records - Probate records are records disposing of a deceased
                  individual's property. They may include an individual's
                  last will and testament, if one was made. The information
                  you can get from probate records varies, but usually
                  includes the name of the deceased, either the deceased's
                  age at the time of death or birth date, property, members
                  of the family, and the last place of residence.
Progenitor - A direct ancestor.
Progeny - Descendants of a common ancestor; issue.
Proved Will - A will established as genuine by probate court.
Provost - A person appointed to superintend, or preside over something.
Property - Any kind of thing which has a value and which one can exercise the
           rights of ownership upon, including possession, use, and disposal.
Propriety - Property, or a share of property along with the shareholder's
            rights.
Protraction - In the rectangular survey system, the representation of a
              boundary or corner not run, marked, or fixed by the field
              survey as evidenced by the field notes. For example, a surveyed
              section might be protracted into lots by someone in the office.
Prove Up - See Improve.
Proximo - In the following month, in the month after the present one.
Public Domain - Land owned by the government.
Pueblo - A Spanish grant of less than 1000 acres.
Punk - See railroad.
Pvt. - Abbreviation for military rank of private.
QCD - Abbreviation for Quitclaim Deed.
Quadroon - Child of a mulatto and white parentage; a child with one black
           grandparent.
Quaker - Member of the Religious Society of Friends.
Quarter corner - In the public land surveying system, a point halfway
                 between the corners of a section. A section can be divided
                 into four equal quarters by connecting its quarter corner
                 points. A section's quarter corners are identified by the
                 section line they are located on (north, south, east, west).
Quiet Title - A legal proceeding to determine the title of property claimed
              by multiple parties.
Quitclaim Deed - A common type of deed in which the seller relinquishes
                 claim to whatever rights were held on the property, but
                 does not guarantee that the property is actually free of
                 claims by others.
Quit Rent - (1) A patent is essentially a long-term lease and implies that
            the lessor must pay for the lease of the land. Under British law
            an annual rent was due the Crown. When the land is sold the new
            owner takes on the lease and the payment of rent. This practice
            continued in the Colonies. It is roughly equivalent to tax on
            the land. (2) A rent paid by the tenant of a freehold (i.e.,
            on purchased property) to the grantor by which the tenant goes
            quit and free, that is, discharged from any other rent.
Quod Vide - Directs the reader to look in another part of the book for
            further information.
q.v. - Abbreviation for quod vide. 
Railroad - Slang for eleven, as in 42-railroad (42.11)
Rancho - A Spanish grant of more than 1000 acres.
Range - In the U.S. public land surveying system, a north-south column
        of townships, identified as being east or west of a reference
        longitudinal meridian, for example, Range 3 West. See township.
Rathbone's Chain - A measuring chain two poles, or 33 feet, in length.
R.C. - Abbreviation for Roman Catholic.
Real Property - Land and anything attached to it, such as houses, building,
                barns, growing timber, growing crops, etc.
rec'd - Abbreviation for received.
Receiver - Person appointed by court to hold property until a suit is settled.
Reconveyance - Property sold to another person is transferred back to the
               original owner.
Rector - A clergyman; the ruler or governor of a country.
Red cedar - a type of tree.
Red oak - a type of tree.
Reeve - Churchwarden; early name for sheriff in England.
reg. - Abbreviation for register.
Release - see Quitclaim.
Relict - Widow; surviving spouse when one has died, husband or wife.
Relicta - Widow.
Relictus - Widower.
Remainder - Transfer of ownership to someone on the death of another. For
            example, land may be sold to person A for use during their
            lifetime, but then remaindered to person B at the death of A.
Remise - To relinquish a claim to something, specifically to release or
         quitclaim an interest in real estate.
Replevin - An action brought to recover property unlawfully taken. See also
           Distrain, Foreclose.
Republic - Government in which supreme authority lies with the people or
           their elected representatives.
repud. - Abbreviation for repudiate.
res. - Abbreviation for residence; research.
Researcher ID Card - All researchers using original records at the National
                     Archives or National Archives regional centers must get
                     a researcher ID card. If you just plan to use microfilmed
                     records, you do not need to get an ID card. To get an ID
                     card you will be asked to fill out an application. You
                     should bring photo identification, such as a driver's
                     license, school identification card, or passport on
                     your first visit to the archives. Researcher ID cards
                     are free of charge and are valid for two years. The
                     ID card must be presented at each visit.
Reservation - A clause in a deed wherein seller retains a right in the
              land being sold but the specific right did not previously
              exist. "Reserving a right of way" is an example if the right
              of way did not previously exist. See also Exception.
Residuary Legatee - see Legatee.
Resurvey - see Caveat, Certificate of Mislocation.
ret. - Abbreviation for retired.
Return of Survey - see Survey.
Rev. - Abbreviation for reverend.
Rev. War - Abbreviation for Revolutionary War.
Revert - Return of ownership to a former owner (or heirs).
Revolutionary War - U.S. war for independence from Great Britain 1775 - 1783.
Right of Entry - Permission to enter someone's property.
Right-of-Way - see Easement.
Riparian - Relating to land under water or below the high tide line.
Riser - A tree branch or other similar object stuck in the ground and
        flagged to mark a survey point.
River - Large stream.
R.O. - Abbreviation for Red Oak, which is used extensively within the
       surveys as a marker or point of reference.
Road Return - The record of a survey of the right-of-way for a public road,
              typically mentioning property owners and/or buildings or
              other landmarks.
Rod - See measurements.
ROE - Abbreviation for Right of Entry.
Rood - See measurements.
Room - "in the room of" means in the place of, instead of.
Run - Small stream.
Rustica - Country girl
Rusticus - Country boy. 
s. - Abbreviation for son.
s. and h. - Abbreviation for son and heir.
Sapling, (saplin) - young tree.
Sassafras - bark used in medicines and beverages.
Scire Facias - A writ requiring a party to show why a judgment should not
               be vacated, executed, or annulled.
Scrub oak - usually found in dry, rocky soil.
Searles Spiral - A surveying technique used by railroad surveyors in the
                 the late 1800s and early 1900s whereby they approximate
                 a spiral by use of multiple curved segments.
Secondary Evidence - Evidence that is inferior to primary evidence or the
                     best evidence.
Secondary Source - A secondary source is a record that was created a
                   significant amount of time after an event occurred. For
                   example, a marriage certificate would be a secondary
                   source for a birth date, because the birth took place
                   several years before the time of the marriage. However,
                   that same marriage certificate would be a primary source
                   for a marriage date, because it was created at the time
                   of the marriage.
Section - In the U.S. public land surveying system, an area one mile
          square. See aliquot.
Seised/Seized - Legally owning and possessing real property.
Seisin/Seizin - Ownership or 'in fact' possession of a freehold
                estate. Inferred here is an increasing degree of ownership
                with the passage of time, as the possessor makes productive
                use of the land. Seizin was originally not an estate,
                but a way to gain one, as by adverse possession. This is
                rooted in the Roman concept that whoever worked the land
                should be its owner.
Self-Addressed Stamped Envelope - When you request records or other
                                  information from people and institutions,
                                  you should include a self-addressed stamped
                                  envelope (SASE) in your letter. Of course,
                                  a SASE with U.S. postage stamps on it is
                                  only good in the United States. If you
                                  are expecting return mail from overseas,
                                  you should include an International
                                  Reply Coupon with your self-addressed
                                  envelope. This coupon serves as payment
                                  for any international postage you may
                                  need to pay. They can be purchased at
                                  your local post office.
Seisin - (or Seizin) Right to immediate possession (in accordance with the
         nature of the property).
Sergeantry - Non-military service to a lord in exchange for land.
serv. - Abbreviation for servant.
Serviceberry - (sarvisberry).
Servitude - An encumbrance attached to land, specifically one that imposes
            a burden on the owner. Contrast with easement.
Setback - Required minimum distance new construction must have from the
          sides of the property, the street, and other structures. Setbacks
          are defined by local ordinance.
Shaker - Member of a religious group formed in 1747 which practiced communal
         living and celibacy.
Shoal - Shallows.
Sibling - Person having one or both parents in common with another; a
          brother or sister.
sic - Latin meaning thus; copied exactly as the original reads.  Often
      suggests a mistake or surprise in the original.
s/o - Abbreviation for son of.
S.O. - Abbreviation for Spanish Oak, which is used extensively within the
       surveys as a marker or point of reference.
soc. - Abbreviation for society.
Socage - Holding of land by a tenant in return for fixed payment or for
         non-military service to the lord. This system was eventually
         replaced by our system of taxation. See quitrent.
Social Security Death Index -  The Social Security Death Index is an index of
                               Social Security Death records. Generally this
                               includes names of deceased Social Security
                               recipients whose relatives applied for
                               Social Security Death Benefits after their
                               passing. Also included in the millions of
                               records are approximately 400,000 railroad
                               retirement records from the early 1900s
                               to 1950s.
Soke - The jurisdiction of a court.
Son-in-Law - Husband of one's daughter.
Soundex - Phonetic indexing system.
Source - The document, record, publication, manuscript, etc. used to prove
         a fact.
Sour gum - see tupelo.
Sourwood - sorrel tree.
Spanish oak - a type of tree.
Special Warranty Deed - A warranty deed constrained to the period during
                        which seller owned the property. Claims for title
                        defects that predate the seller's ownership period
                        are not warranteed.
Spike - Usually a 60 penny nail used to mark survey points in hard ground.
Spinster - A woman still unmarried; or one who spins.
Sponsor - A bondsman; surety.
Spouse - Husband or wife.
Spring - A pool or other source of water that feeds a stream.
Spruce - a type of tree.
Square Mile - See measurements.
srnm. - Abbreviation for surname, last name.
St. - Abbreviation for saint; street.
Standard Corner - a corner that is on a standard parallel or base line
Statute - Law.
Step - Used in conjunction with a degree of kinship.
Step-Brother - Male child of one's step-father or step-mother.
Step-Child - Child of one's husband or wife from a previous marriage.
Step-Father - Husband of one's mother by a later marriage.
Step-Mother - Wife of one's father by a later marriage.
Step-Sister - Female child of one's step-father or step-mother.
Stirpes - see Per Stirpes.
Stob - In the southeast U.S., a wooden stake or post, but in modern surveying,
       a piece of rebar used to mark a property boundary.
Straw Deed, Strawman Deed - Two deeds filed in succession, the first from
                            party A to party B, second from B back to A. This
                            was used to sidestep legal restrictions of sales
                            between spouses or joint owners, or to incorporate
                            a new survey description. Party B is a trusted
                            intermediary, either a close friend or attorney.
Strip - A rectangular piece of land adjoining a parcel, created when a
        resurvey turns up a tiny bit larger than the original survey. The
        difference is accounted for by temperature or other effects on
        measuring chains. See also gore.
Sugar tree - sugar maple.
Sumac - (shumac).
surg. - Abbreviation for surgeon.
Surname - Family name or last name.
Survey - Later, sometimes called a "plat". The actual field survey that
         contains the metes and bounds of the land and accurately depicts the
         tract. Surveys may be narrative only or contain plats and narrative.
Survivorship - When a person becomes entitled to property by surviving
               another person (e.g., a spouse) who had an interest in it.
Swale - A low, generally marshy tract of land, either natural or manmade,
        e.g. for managing water runoff.
Swamp - In the southeastern U.S., a stream, particularly one that has has
        swampy parts. A marsh.
Swamp white oak - heavy, hard wood used in shipbuilding, furniture, etc.
Sweet gum - hard reddish brown wood used for furniture.
Sycamore - a type of tree.
Surety - Sponsor, a bondsman.
T. - Abbreviation for township.
T.A.B. - Abbreviation for Trespass, Assault, and Battery.
Tamarack - an American larch having reddish brown bark.
Tamarisk - small shrub found in the southwest.
Tangent line - A line that touches a circle at exactly one point and which
               makes a right angle with the circle's radius. For example,
               a circle that fills a square has four tangent points and the
               square's sides are tangent lines. An arc (curve) in a survey
               is part of a larger circle. One can construct tangent lines
               at the end points of the arc.
Tangible property - The opposite of intangible property. Examples are land
                    or other movable personal property that has a physical
                    reality.
Tenancy - The estate of a tenant. "Joint tenancy" is an estate arising from
          the purchase by or grant to two or more persons. "Tenancy in
          common" means that each tenant has a right to occupy the whole
          in common with his cotenants. A joint tenant can acquire the
          interest of the other joint tenant by right of survivorship;
          however, tenants in common do not have this right.
Tenancy by the entirety - A form of joint tenancy held by husband and
                          wife. Title automatically transfers to the survivor
                          upon the death of one party. Neither party can
                          sell or divide the property without the consent
                          of the other.
Tenancy in common - Title held by two or more people where each person can
                    sell their interest without the consent of the other
                    owners. There are no rights of survivorship.
Tenant - One who holds or possesses lands or tenements by any kind of right
         or title, whether in fee, for life, for years, at will, or otherwise.
Tenement - Property held by a tenant; everything of a permanent nature on
           a property.  Typically used to mean houses and other buildings.
Tenure - The right to hold. Also, the hierarchical feudal system of land
         holding, i.e. king to lord to serf.
terr. - Abbreviation for territory.
Territory - Area of land owned by the United States, not a state, but having
            its own legislature and governor.
test. - Abbreviation for testament.
Testamentary - Pertaining to a will.
Testate - A person who dies leaving a valid will.
Testator - A person who makes a valid will before his death.
Testatrix - A female Testator.
Teste - (Latin). Witness.
Testis - Witness.
Thalweg - 1. An imaginary line connecting the lowest points of a
          valley. 2. The line connecting the lowest points of a stream's
          channel. 3. The surface midline of a channel.
Thirds - see dower
Thread of a creek - A figurative expression used to signify the center line
                    of the main channel of a stream when the flow rate is low.
Tie line - A survey line that connects a point to other surveyed lines.
Tier - In the U.S. public land surveying system, an east-west row of
       townships identified as being north or south of a latitudinal baseline.
Tillage - Cultivated or tilled land. Compare with Fallow Land.
Tithable - Taxable.
Tithe - Formerly, money due as a tax for support of the clergy or church.
Title - The right to or ownership in land; the means whereby the owner of
        lands has legal possession of his property.
TOC - Abbreviation for Trespass on the case.
Toise - Traditional French unit of length equal to 6 old French 'pieds'
        or feet, or 6.4 English feet.
Top - Slang for eleven. See railroad.
Tory - Loyalist; one who supported the British side in the American
       Revolution.
Total station - A survey instrument that combines a theodolite and distance
                meter.
To wit - That is to say.
Town Grant - (or Town Lot, Townlands) Lands granted within a planned
             settlement or additional lands granted to established
             settlers. In early New Jersey settlements, town lots contained
             a few acres and a proportion of meadow land was granted to
             each settler outside the town. See also Headright.
Township - A division of U.S. public land that contained 36 sections,
           or 36 square miles.  Also a subdivision of the county in many
           Northeastern and Midwestern states of the U.S.
Tract - A piece of land. A parcel.
Tradition - The handing down of statements, beliefs, legends, customs,
            genealogies, etc. from generation to generation, especially by
            word of mouth.
Transcribe - To make a copy in writing.
Traverse - 1) any line surveyed across a parcel, 2) a series of such
           lines connecting a number of points, often used as a base for
           triangulation.
Trend - the bearing of a line along a falling course.
Trespass - Doing an unlawful act or lawful act in an unlawful manner to
           the injury/damage of another person or his property (see also
           Ejectment).
Trespass on the case - Similar to trespass, but for damages suffered
                       indirectly.
Trip - Slang for triple digits, as in trip5 means 555, and 43trip7 means
       43.777
Trocha - Spanish for 'path'. In the southeast U.S. it is used for a cut or
         cleared survey line.
Trust - Confidence placed in someone by giving them property to be held or
        used for another's benefit. The property held in trust.
Trustee - An individual to whom another's property is entrusted.
Try Title - To test the validity of someone's title to property.
Tupelo - a type of tree.
Turf and Twig - A feudal ceremony of property conveyance involving physical
                transfer of a small piece of earth and a small branch
                representing the property being transfered. See Livery
                of Seizin.
Turn - The rodman is told to stay in place while the gun or level is moved
       to a new location.
twp. - Abbreviation for township.
ult - Abbreviation for ultimo.
Ultimo - In the month before this one.
Unappropriated Land - (or Undiscovered Land) Land for which there has been
                      no severance of title from the proprietors.
Undivided Right - A right or title held by two or more tenants in common or
                  joint tenants before partition; a right held jointly (by the
                  same title), whether equal or unequal in value or quantity.
Union - The United States; also the North during the Civil War, the states
        which did not secede.
unk. - Abbreviation for unknown.
unm. - Abbreviation for unmarried.
Unprobated Will - Will never submitted for probate.
Unsolemn Will - Will in which an executor is not named.
Upland - (or Headlands) The higher part of a region or tract (see also
         Meadow).
Upper - Toward the head of a stream. Further up along its course. Opposite
        of lower.
uxor. - Wife, spouse, consort. 
Vacate - 1) To set aside or render void, 2) to move out.
Valid - That which is legal and binding.
Vara - Unit of length (the "Spanish yard") used in the U.S. southwest. The
       vara is used throughout the Spanish speaking world and has values
       around 33 inches, depending on locale. The legal value in Texas was
       set to 33 1/3 inches early in the 1900's.
Venue - (or Visne) The geographical division (neighborhood, place or county)
        where an injury is declared to have been done or fact declared to
        have happened.
Vendue - A sale, generally at public auction.
Verbatim - Word for word; in the same words, verbally.
Vestry - Administrative group within a parish; the ruling body of a church.
Vidua - Widow.
Viduus - Widower.
Virgate - An old English unit of area, equal to one quarter of a hide. The
          amount of land needed to support a person.
Virgo - Used to describe an unmarried woman in English and European marriage
        records.
Vital Records - Records of birth, death, marriage or divorce.
Vital Statistics - Data dealing with birth, death, marriage or divorce.
Viz., Vizt. - Videlicet (Latin). That is to say.
Vly - (Dutch) Swampy lowland.
Walnut - black
War Between the States - U.S. Civil War, 1861 - 1865.
Ward - Chiefly the division of a city for election purposes.
Warrant - (or Land Warrant) This document authorizes the survey to be
          made and often includes the survey information. Warrants do
          not convey title nor do they legally define the specific tract
          location. Warrants are made to the granting authority, though
          they may also be made directly to the surveyor.
Warranty Deed - Guarantees a clear property title from the seller to
                the buyer.
Waste Land - Land that has not been claimed, or which has escheated. 
Waters ("watters") of - In the drainage of. On the branches of. 
WD - Abbreviation for Warranty Deed.
Wheelwright - Person who makes and repairs vehicle wheels, such as carts,
              wagons, etc.
White oak - a type of tree.
White Rent - Blackmail; rent to be paid in silver.
Widow - A widow is a woman whose husband has died.
Widower - A widower is a man whose wife has died.
Will - Document declaring how a person wants his property divided after
       his death.
Witness - One who is present at a transaction, such as a sale of land or
          signing of a will, who can testify or affirm that it actually
          took place.
Witness Tree - Generally used in the public land states and refers to the
               trees close to a section corner. The surveyor blazes them and
               notes their position relative to the corner in his notebook.
               Witness trees are used as evidence for the corner location.
W.O. - Abbreviation for White Oak, which is used extensively within the
       surveys as a marker or point of reference.
Wooly Bumelia - leaves resemble a live oak with a fine fur-like fuzz on
                the underside.
WPA Historical Records Survey - A program undertaken by the US Government
                                1935 - 1936 in which inventories were
                                compiled of historical material.
Writ of Attachment - Court order authorizing the seizure of property
                     sufficient to cover debts and court costs for not
                     appearing in court.
Writ of Summons - Document ordering a person to appear in court.
Xylographer - A person who used and made wooden blocks used in printing
              illustrations.
Yeoman - A servant, an attendant or subordinate official in a royal household;
         a subordinate of a sheriff; an independent farmer. In English law,
         a commoner; a freeholder under the rank of gentleman.
Yew - a type of tree.
Zenith angle - An angle measured from a vertical reference. Zero degrees
               is a vertical line pointing up, 90 degrees is horizontal,
               and 180 degrees is straight down.
Zero - Zero degrees, minutes, and seconds. A perfect zero. 
Zincographer - A designer who etched in relief a pattern on zinc plates
               used for printing.
Zitherist - A player of a simple, flat many-stringed instrument; rare:
            a bard or minstrel.

