
from
NGS Monthly
Jan 2019

BEGIN

Dutch Naming Systems in Early America
Aaron Goodwin

Among the NGSQ Archives are countless articles on sound genealogical research
methodology. Some of those articles are so well-written and useful that
they have become must-use resources for genealogists ever since. One such
timeless contribution comes from NGS Hall-of-Famer Rosalie Fellows Bailey
(elected in 2010). In 1953, she published the two-part article, "Dutch
Systems in Family Naming: New York and New Jersey."[1]

While this work may be particularly helpful for researchers of New York
and New Jersey, every researcher of the Dutch in early America and their
descendants throughout the Mid-Atlantic and Midwest will find this resource
a critical tool in solving their Dutch problems. Those with non-Dutch
ancestors who lived in New Netherland, New York, and New Jersey may also
make discoveries here by understanding how the Dutch recorded both first
and last names, sometimes well into the 18th century.

Revisiting this topic is particularly timely for NGS members as the 2018 NGS
Conference will be held in May in Grand Rapids, Michigan, the destination
region of one of the Dutch migrations to the Midwest. The conference features
eight separate lectures on various aspects of Dutch and Dutch-American
research. You can find them in the Conference Registration Brochure online
by searching "dutch."

Readers who take the time to read Bailey's original twenty pages will
find themselves rewarded with more than mere tidbits about strange and
befuddling practices. Dutch naming systems are so important, in fact,
that gaining a thorough understanding of them gives researchers the most
effective tools they can possibly have to answer longstanding questions and
identify new avenues of research. The summary below is merely an appetizer,
whereas Bailey's article provides real meat and a deeper value.

I. The Patronymic

A patronymic is a name that identifies and uses the subject's father's given
name, the primary naming system among the Dutch in early America. Most of
Europe had adopted surnames by the 17th century, but it's the same system
that led, for example, to the English surnames Johnson or Richardson. Those
names were originally derived from the patronymic that meant son of John or
son of Richard. Rather than the suffix -son, the Dutch suffix of the same
meaning can be -szen, -sen, -se, or –z. The feminine version can be -se,
–sd, –sdr, –sen, or the full suffix sdochter ("daughter of").

As illustrated in Table 1, "Johnson Family of Western Long Island," (all
tables referenced are in the original article) Jan Barentz van Driest,
immigrant from Zutphen, Gelderland, to Gravesend, Long Island, was the
father of Barent Jansen. Barent Jansen was the father of Jan Barentse
Jansen. By the time he wrote his will in 1757, Jan Barentse Jansen's name
had evolved into the anglicized surname John Johnson. John Johnson's son,
Barent Johnson, had several sons including Revolutionary War Major General
Jeremiah Johnson, whose name entirely obscures his Dutch ancestry. A second
table, "Ryerson—Ryers—Martense—Adriance," illustrates the spelling
variations of patronymics as well as their evolution into various surnames.

II. Place-Origin Surname

The place-origin surname, usually prefixed with van (or from) but sometimes
with de (or the), was also a popular way for the early Dutch-American to
identify himself and to establish a surname. Those places of origin could
be of several types: 1) nationality; 2) town or village; 3) small local
district; 4) named farm-estate for which the subject is owner, leaseholder,
or tenant; 5) named farm-estate for which the subject is a hired farmhand,
unrelated to the family in the main dwelling; 6) named field; 7) named
small farm occupied by a peasant (or boer), often a subdivision of a named
farm-estate; 8) a named house with a sign; or 9) a local habitat. Table 5,
"Van Woert—Rutgers—Rutsen," illustrates the evolution of one place-origin
name, van Woert (from the village of Schoonrewoerd), to three distinct
surname lines.

III. The Occupational Surname

Dutch-American surnames derived from this category are those such as Bleecker
(bleacher of cloth), Schenck (filler, butler, cupbearer), Koylert/Cuyler
(archer), Blauvelt (blue field, referring to a flax farmer), or Clark
(clerk). These names are sometimes used intermittently with patronymics
and developing surnames.

IV. Personal-Characteristic Surname

While this type of surname is particularly common among the English, it
is less so for the Dutch. Examples include Vroom/Vroman (pious or wise
man), Stille (silent), Krom (bent, crooked, cripple), Krankheyt/Cronkhite
(sickness, invalid), de Groot (the big man), de Lange (the tall man), de Witt
(the white man), or de Wint (wind, fuss, braggart). The use of the Dutch de
(or the) reminds us that not all surnames with de are of French origin.

V. The Order of Names

When two or more of the name components covered above are used together,
they usually follow a particular order: 1) social status; 2), the first
name; 3), the patronymic; 4) the surname, if any; 5) place of origin or
residence; and 6) any term used to indicate occupation. The name Teunis
Tomassen van Naarden metzlaer, for example, uses the second, third, fifth,
and sixth elements in order.

Titles that refer to social status are rarely used, but are significant
when they are. Those titles may include Joncker (member of the nobility);
de Heer, dr Hr, or dhr (official such as magistrate); Sieur, Sinjeur, or Sr
(man of standing); Dne, Dom, D., etc. (Domine or Reverend); Dr (doctor of
law); Mr (master, such as of a guild or of an occupation); Juffrouw or Joffr
(important married woman); or the very rare Mevrouw (very important woman).

VI. Last Names of Married Women

Under the Dutch naming system, women did not change their name at marriage,
a particularly useful fact for researchers. Table 8, "Family of the
Thrice-Married Maritie Damen," illustrates how a woman's identity can prove
complex family relationships. Maritie Damen married three times and had
children by each of her first two husbands, but her third husband's children
were not hers. None of the children have surviving baptism records, a key
source for Dutch research, but because Maritie's name remained unchanged,
she is easily found in various records of the City and County of Albany. Her
name, in combination with other names and stated relationships, firmly
identifies her husbands and children.

This method of identification is especially useful when a husband had a
common name. There were, for example, eleven different Claes Janszens
who were contemporaries; their wives' names delineate them. It's also
useful when a man went by various name types over time. Teunis Tomassen van
Naarden (patronymic and place-origin), Teunis Tomassen Quick (patronymic and
personal-characteristic), Theunis Thoomas (patronymic), and Teunis Thomaszen
metzlaer (patronymic and occupation [mason]) are proven to refer to the same
man by finding these variations in combination with his wife, Belitje Jacobs.

A woman's name was determined in much the same way a man's name was. If
her family had a surname or the name of their place of origin, she may
use that. In the generation in which a surname was being established,
her last name might switch back and forth between patronymic and surname
as her brothers' probably did. Patronymics were most common, which could
refer to a woman's stepfather as well as her father.

In the earliest Dutch period, however, a woman sometimes used her husband's
first name as her last, particularly when her father was not known in
America. Table 9, "Susanna Dircx' Relatives," illustrates this with two
examples. Albert Andriesz' wife was Annitje Alberts in her mother's 1642
will. And Jan Jansen Bratt's wife was called Maritie Jans in their joint
1673 will, but signed her name Maritie Dirck (after her first husband,
Dirck Dircksz Mayer).

Though it was not the custom in America, some Dutch immigrants used their
mother's name, especially if she had an established surname while the father
did not. The immigrant Schuyler brothers were born in Amsterdam to Pieter
Tjerks and Geertruyt Philips van Schuylder.

Only after English influence began to overcome Dutch naming customs, well
into the 18th century, did women begin taking their husband's surnames.

VII. Godparents or Sponsors

Records of the Dutch Reformed churches in America are critical research
tools in Dutch-American research. Not only are women's maiden names recorded
continuously there, but godparents are also named. The Dutch practice of
having close relatives serve as godparents means that these records can
reveal a more extended family. Table 10, "Godparents of Anthony Rutgers'
Children," illustrates the names and relationships of each godparent for
each of Anthony's fifteen children. All of them are relatives, including
grandparents, aunts, uncles, great-aunts, great-uncles, half-siblings,
and one grandmother's second husband.

It's also useful to know that, although not absolute, the Dutch had a
tendency to have godparents chosen alternately from each side of the family
for each successive child's baptism. Once this pattern is established in a
given family, any disruption to the pattern serves as a clue to a possible
missing child in that family group.

VIII. First Name of Children

With rare exceptions, Dutch children were named after relatives. In
particular, the first two boys and first two girls were generally named
after their grandparents. Other practices were more tendencies than customs,
including 1) naming the first child for a paternal grandparent; 2) naming the
first child (if a boy) of a woman's second marriage for her first husband;
3) alternating each child's name to be taken from one side of the family
and then the other; 4) giving the name of a child who died to the next
child born of that gender. The last practice tended to take precedence
over naming a child for a grandparent. Table 11, "Rutgers—Family Group,"
illustrates these patterns perfectly.

Customs such as these are powerful research tools. In the absence of church
records, for example, the names of children in a man's will could reveal
the names of the testator's parents and inlaws. In some instances, certain
first names appear regularly in particular families. Seeing them appear in
other families may suggest a previously unknown intermarriage between the
two families.

IX. The Diminutive

Diminutive names include both shortened names and terms of
endearment. Examples of abbreviation include Thys for Matthys,
Claes for Nicolaes, Jaap for Jacob, and Bartel, Mees, or Meus for
Bartelmeus. Diminutives were extensively used for girls' names, both in
abbreviation and in endearment. Similar to the -ie and -y suffix in English
(e.g. Jenny or Susie) is the Dutch -tje or -je. Maritje is an endearing
version of Maria, as is Giertje for Geertruy. Female names that are both
abbreviated and endearing include Grietje for Margriet and Tryntje for
Catrina.

X. Dutch-English Equivalents of First Names

Lists have been compiled of English equivalents of Dutch names, but Bailey
warns researchers to use those lists with caution. In actual practice, the
rendering of a Dutch person's name was the result of a number of variables,
including phonetic spelling, varying pronunciation in Dutch, English, and
French, and the skills of the clerk. In one example, the name Neeltje Swem
appears on the 1703 Staten Island census as Elener Swan. Neeltje is the
feminine form of Cornelius, so one might expect it to appear in English
as Cornelia. But Neeltje looks and sounds more like Nellie, the English
diminutive of Eleanor. So Elener was recorded for Neeltje.

XI. Translation of the Foreign Name: Dutch, English, French

Dutch magistrates and clerks in New Netherland generally attempted to render
foreign names into Dutch. Charles Bridges, for example, was an Englishman in
New Netherland, where his name was generally recorded as Carel van Brugge or
Verbruggen. Even after the English took over New Netherland in 1664, the Dutch
Reformed churches continued this practice in their record-keeping. In a 1673
baptism, the father Willem Kerck was actually Englishman William Churchill.

The same is true for French names. Nicholas Dupue's wife is recorded in Dutch
church records of New York City as Catharina Reynards, Catalina Duvois,
Catharina de Vos, and Catharina Reynardt. These variations represent no
conflict in identifying her as one woman. Reynard and Vos are the same,
as they are the French and Dutch words for fox.

Names were also translated from Dutch to English: Kuyper became Cooper; van
Langevelt became Longfield; and Thomas Laurenszen Popinga dropped his original
surname, changed his patronymic to his surname, and became Thomas Lawrence.

XII. Alteration of the Foreign Name: Dutch, English, French

When a name couldn't be effectively translated, phonetic spelling came into
play. Thus the French girl Adrienne Cuvellier was called Ariaentje Cuvilje
in Dutch records. George Woolsey was referred to as Jarge Woltzen. These
were close approximations in pronunciation, producing names that did not
exist in Dutch, a hint to their non-Dutch origins. Other phonetic spellings
produced actual Dutch names that sounded the same, perhaps obscuring a
non-Dutch origin. The English Cole sounds precisely the same as the Dutch
Cool. The same is true for the English Lake and the Dutch Leek. These are
just a few of the examples of alterations given.

If your research includes Dutch ancestry in America in the 17th- and
18th-centuries, you'll want to print out Bailey's two-part article, read it,
and keep it handy as a constant guide. When you get stuck, pull it out again,
and re-read it. The threads of Dutch-American research are found in their
naming customs, and you'll almost certainly find a new thread to pursue.

[1] Rosalie Fellows Bailey, "Dutch Systems in Family Naming: New York and New
Jersey," Part I, National Genealogical Society Quarterly, 41 (March 1953),
1-11; and Part II, 41 (December 1953), 109–118); also, "Dutch Systems
in Family Naming: Corrections to Part I," 41 (September 1953), 98; PDFs,
NGSQ Archives (https://www.ngsgenealogy.org/cs/ngsq_archives : 23 Jan. 2018).

END



from
https://www.whodoyouthinkyouaremagazine.com/feature/scottish-names-and-naming-traditions/
and
National Records of Scotland

BEGIN

Scottish naming traditions

If you are researching your Scottish ancestors, it is worth knowing that the
Scots often named their children following a traditional pattern. This can
help you confirm relationships although it is important to keep in mind that
not all families stuck to these rules and the tradition gradually declined
during the 19th century.

    1st son named after father's father
    2nd son named after mother's father
    3rd son named after father
    1st daughter named after mother's mother
    2nd daughter named after father's mother
    3rd daughter named after mother

END



from the Internet:

BEGIN

Old German Naming Customs

The first name of each Daughter was usually the first name of the Mother.

The first name of the Son was usually the first name of the Father.

Often times the middle name of each child was the name of the baby's
baptismal sponsor and they were usually called by his/her middle name.

It is also common to use:
  the mother's maiden name as a second name;
  the surname of close friends as a second name;
  give another child exactly the same name as a previous child who had died;
  give a child the name of a relative or friend who had recently died.

When they left Germany they also left children behind and called the first
born in the new world after there sons and daughters, so it was not uncommon
to have two sons or daughters by the same name.

They also used a saint's name for the first name and the child went by the
middle name. This was very common.


Old Irish Naming Customs

1st son was named after the father's father
2nd son was named after the mother's father
3rd son was named after the father
4th son was named after the father's eldest brother
5th son was named after the mother's eldest brother

1st daughter was named after the mother's mother
2nd daughter was named after the father's mother
3rd daughter was named after the mother
4th daughter was named after the mother's eldest sister
5th daughter was named after the father's eldest sister

Irish 1800's

First Daughter was named after the Paternal Grandmother
Second Daughter was named after the Maternal Grandmother

First Son was named after the Paternal Grandfather
Second Son was named after the Maternal Grandfather

Then alternate names using the Grandmother's, Grandfather's, Mother's,
Aunt's, and Uncle's names.

Sometimes the Middle name was used. Examples would be Michael Joseph.
The child maybe named Joesph. If a family member died sometimes they
used the name again or would call the child after the sister or brother
would just died.

It's important to consider names in all their forms when looking at
family use of the traditional naming patterns. A few examples are:

Many of the names that became common in Ireland are actually anglicized
versions of earlier names. Some examples are Patrick (Pádraig), John
(Sean), Thomas (Tomaltach), James (Seamus) and William (Liam) for boys
and Mary (Maire), Anne (Áine), Kathleen (Caitlin), and Bridget (Brigid)
for girls.

Anglicization of Gaelic names was forced upon the Irish through the
Penal Laws that outlawed use of the Irish language.

Brigid.
The Gaelic form of this girl's name is Brighid, pronounced "Bree-id." In
its most ancient form the name is Brid, pronounced "Breed", a Celtic
goddess whose name meant power or strength. The Irish use of this name
is because of the national affection for St. Brigid of fifth and sixth
century Ireland and should be pronounced with a hard "g". Anglicized, the
name became Bridget, pronounced "Brid-jit", after the Swedish St. Bridget
of the 14th century. There are lots of variations or nicknames encountered
for this name including Brid (Breed), Bride, Breeda, Brigid, Bidelia,
and Delia.

Margaret.
This name was popular because of the Irish affection for the 11th century
St. Margaret, Queen of Scots. In Irish the name is Máiréad, (Maw-rayt
or Maw-reed). Other variations are Maighread (Meh-reed), Peig, and Peigi.

Mary.
Originally Máire, (Maw-zhe, Maw-re or Meh-ree), this name had lots of
variations. Among them were Muire, which meant "devotee of Mary," Mael,
Moira, Maura, Maurya, Mairin (maw-reen), and Maureen.

Diarmaid.
Pronounced "Deer-mit", its oldest form is Diarmait. The original holder
of the name was a warrior in Finn mac Cumhaill's band who had was able
to make women fall instantly in love with him. Variations of the name
are Diarmuid, and anglicized, Dermod, Dermot, Darby, Jeremiah, and Jeremy.

John.
The Irish was originally Eoin, (Oh-en or Oh-een). It derived from the
Latin Johannes. Sean became a popular Irish form after the Norman French
introduced Jehan to the island. Other variations are Shaun, Shane, Sion,
Shawn, and Seaghan, (See-a-gun).


Britian and English Welsh Naming Patterns
English and Welsh 1700-1870

First Daughter was named after the Mother's Mother
Second Daughter was named after the Mother's Father's Mother
Third Daughter was named after the Mother
Fourth Daughter was named after the Mother's oldest Sister

First Son was named after the Father's Father
Second Son was named after the Mother's Mother
Third Son was named after the Father
Fourth Son was named after the Father's oldest Brother

In 18th & 19th Century Britain families generally tended to name their
children in a specific pattern as follows:

Males

    First-born Son - father's father
    Second-born Son - mother's father
    Third-born Son - father
    Fourth-born Son - father's eldest brother
    Fifth-born Son - father's 2nd oldest brother or mother's oldest
                     brother

Females

    First-born Daughter - mother's mother
    Second-born Daughter - father's mother
    Third-born Daughter - mother
    Fourth-born Daughter - mother's eldest sister
    Fifth-born Daughter - mother's 2nd oldest sister or father's oldest
                          sister


Scottish Naming Patterns

Many Scotts families follow the custom of naming thier children after
the grandparents in the following manner.

    First born son named for the paternal grandfather.
    Second son named for the maternal grandfather.
    Third son named for the father.
    First born daughter for the paternal grandmother.
    Second daughter for the maternal grandmother
    Third daughter for the mother.

This can cause families to have two children with the same name if the
grandparents had the same name. The process also started over if the
parent remarried, so it is common to find half brothers or sisters with
the same names. Not all Scotts families followed this pattern, but many
that did continued it long after leaving Scotland.

Naming patterns

People of all countries tend to use forenames which run in the family. In
Scotland families not only use such names but they tend to follow naming
patterns - the most common of which is:

1st son - named after his paternal grandfather
2nd son - named after his maternal grandfather
3rd son - named after his father

1st daughter - named after her maternal grandmother
2nd daughter - named after her paternal grandmother
3rd daughter - named after her mother

Although this naming pattern was not always used, it can be a useful
indication to genealogists. Unfortunately, this pattern is not used to
the same extent today.

Scottish 1700 - 1800 and early Dutch

First Daughter was named for her Maternal Grandmother
Second Daughter was named for her Paternal Grandmother
Third Daughter was named after her Mother
Other Daughters were named after other Family Members

First Son was named after his Paternal Grandfather (sometimes Maternal)
Second Son was named after his Maternal Grandfather (sometimes Paternal)
Third Son was named after his Father

Another way families end up with more than one child with the same name
is through high child mortality. Before modern medicine fewer children
survived to adulthood. Parents often reused the name of a dead child
for the next child born.

SURNAME

In Scotland - as in the rest of Western Europe - there were four main
ways of acquiring a surname:-

Patronymic - taking the father's Christian name e.g. Robertson
Occupation - e.g. Smith (the most common surname of all)
Locality - e.g. Wood
Nickname - e.g. White, Little.

Patronymics - Lowland names such as Wilson, Robertson, Thomson and
Johnson are among the most common surnames in Scotland. 'Mac' names
are also patronymic. MacManus - son of Magnus. 'Mc' is just a printer's
contraction and has no significance as to etymology.

Occupation - Names which are derived from trades and occupations -
mostly found in towns. The most common of these is Smith (the most common
surname in Scotland, England and the USA) but other examples would be
Taylor (tailor) Baxter (baker) and Cooper (barrel maker).

Locality - In Scotland the tendency is for people to be named after places
(in England the tendency is the opposite). Examples of such names are
Morton, Lauder, Menzies and Galloway.

Nickname - Names which could refer to colour or size, e.g. White, Black,
Small, Little. Scottish names in this category include Campbell (meaning
'crooked mouth'). Another example of nickname - this time referring to
the bearers origins - is Scott.

Origins of some Scottish surnames

Fraser - Originally De Frisselle, de Freseliere or De Fresel. The first
recorded bearer of the name was Sir Simon Frasee who held lands in East
Lothian. Fortunate marriages enabled the family to acquire lands all
over Scotland. By such means they acquired Philorth in Buchan in 1375 -
this became the chief seat of the Frasers. The family was raised to the
peerage in the person of the first Lord Lovat. To the Gaels the chief
of the Frasers is known as MacShimidh - 'son of Simon'.

Bruce - A locality name from Normandy - Brix near Cherbourg. The first
recorded bearer of the name accompanied William the Conqueror and the
second accompanied King David to Scotland to claim the throne. This was
the family which produced Robert the Bruce and, although the royal line
died out in 1314, the name Bruce is today among the hundred commonest
Scottish surnames.

Robertson - a patronymic name. The first bearer of the name was Robert,
grandson of Duncan the Fat (Donnchadh Reamhar). The family acquired lands
in the central Highlands. However, the commonality of the name in Scotland
can only be explained, not by any connection to the original family,
but by the large number of people who adopted the name because it was
their fathers' forename. In Gaelic the clan continues to be called Clann
Donnacha - Duncan's children - from their descent from Duncan the Fat.

Stewart - an occupational name. It comes from the office of steward which
was a position of importance under the Crown. Among alternative spellings
of the name are Stuart and Steward. Mary, Queen of Scots favoured the
spelling Stuart as there is no 'W' in the French language. To the Gaels
the Stewarts are known as 'the race of Kings and Tinkers'.


German

18th Century PA German Naming Customs
The Beer Barrel Polka

Internet: http://www.kerchner.com/germname.htm

Date: Written: 18 Aug 1995
Published Online: 2 Oct 1996
Last Updated: 23 Feb 2006

Author: Charles F. Kerchner, Jr.
3765 Chris Drive
Emmaus PA 18049-1544 USA

Notice: Copyright (1995-2003) Charles F. Kerchner, Jr.
All Right Reserved.
Establishing links to this page is encouraged and
permitted. But, reuse or reprinting it in it's entirety
or in part in other websites, or in any other media or
publication, without my permission, is not permitted.
Printing a hard copy of this report for your own
personal, non-commercial use is permitted.
Please notify me of any copyright violations
of this material you may be aware of. Thank you.

1. At baptism, if two given names were given to the child, the first
given name was a spiritual, saint's name. The second given name was the
secular or call name, i.e., "rufnamen", which is the name the person
was known by, both within the family and to the rest of the world. This
custom was originally adopted in Germanic and other regions in Europe
from Roman Catholic tradition and continued by the Protestants in their
baptismal naming customs. The immigrants from these areas brought the
custom with them to Pennsylvania. The spiritual name, usually to honor
a favorite saint, was used repeatedly and was usually given to all the
children of that family of the same gender. Thus the boys would be Johan
Adam Kerchner, Johan George Kerchner, etc., or Philip Peter Kerchner,
Philip Jacob Kerchner, etc. Girls would be named Anna Barbara Kerchner,
Anna Margaret Kerchner, etc., or Maria Elizabeth Kerchner, Maria Catherine
Kerchner, etc. But after baptism, these people would not be known as John,
Philip, Anna, or Maria, respectively. They would instead be known by
what we would think of now as their middle name, which was their secular
name. Thus these people would be known respectively as Adam, George,
Peter, Jacob, Barbara, Margaret, Elizabeth, and Catherine in legal and
secular records. For males, the saint's name Johan or John for Saint John
was particularly heavily used by many German families, but also Saint
George was used by some families for male children. The child's secular
name was really John, if and only if, at baptism he was named only John,
usually spelled as Johannes, with no second given name. The name John
spelled as Johannes is rarely seen spelled as Johannes as a spiritual
name, i.e., you rarely will see the name at baptism recorded as Johannes
Adam Kerchner, etc. It is generally always found spelled as Johan or
Johann when used as a spiritual name. Thus, you find the spiritual name
of John recorded as Johan Adam Kerchner or Johann Adam Kerchner, not
Johannes Adam Kerchner. Many researchers, new to German names, who find
a baptism of an individual with a name such as Johan Adam Kerchner, thus
mistakenly spend a lot of time looking for a John Kerchner, in legal and
census records, when he was known after baptism, to the secular world, as
Adam Kerchner. Also when reading county histories, etc., especially those
written by individuals in the 20th century, and the author is referring
to someone as John Kerchner, and you are not looking for a John Kerchner,
but the history sounds otherwise familiar, further research may turn up
that this person was really not a John Kerchner, but instead was someone
else such as a Johan George Kerchner. You would thus find all his 18th
century records recorded under the name George Kerchner and not John
Kerchner and therefore after checking the data and correlating the facts
you may find this is really a story about your missing George Kerchner.

As I said, the use of Saint John was the most common example of this
custom, but Saint George was often used too. And thus one would find
children in a family named George Heinrich ......, George Jacob ......,
George Frederick ....., and of course simply George ..... by itself. In
these examples the secular or call names would respectively be Heinrich,
Jacob, Frederick, and George.

This naming custom slowly died out in Pennsylvania during the later part
of the 19th century, i.e., after the 1870's.

Classic examples of errors caused by not knowing of this naming custom
are seen in a work titled "Genealogical and Biographical Annals of
Northumberland County PA", It was published in 1911 by J.L. Floyd &
Company of Chicago IL. One specific example of this misnaming error in
that work is on page 659 in the paragraph in the upper left column which
begins, "John Wetzel ...". This person is not a Johannes or John Wetzel
but is instead a Johan "George" Wetzel and is known secularly in all legal
records as George Wetzel. He was married to Eva Elizabeth Kerchner. There
are many more examples in this work and other county histories written
by people unfamiliar with 18th Century PA German Naming Customs.

Modern computer programs which generate automatic reports and books
from genealogical databases are compounding the confusion because these
programs tend to generate paragraphs and sentences using the first given
name only, which as I have explained was not the real call name of the
person in the 18th century. Computer programs need to be modified to
allow the user to select which given name of the full series of given
names is the proper call name, i.e, the first or second given name. Or
better yet, the program should have a setting whereby both given names
are always used together in tandem in the computer generated text when
referring to an individual. Oh well, one can only hope. :-)

2. The term "Senior" and "Junior" following a name did not necessarily
imply a father and son relationship, as it does now. It could have been
an uncle and nephew who had the same name and lived near each other. It
could be a grandfather and a grandchild living together, where the father
has died. It could even be two unrelated individuals with the same name
but of different ages who lived near each other. So to help friends and
business associates keep track of who-was-who in their discussions and
records, they added on the "Sr." or "Jr." which merely meant the older
and the younger, respectively.

3. The term cousin was widely used to mean an extended family, not the
specific legal definition we understand it to be today.

4. It was a common practice in some German families to name the first
born son after the child's paternal grandfather and the second born son
after the maternal grandfather. Here are several more detailed naming
patterns practiced by some families.

Pattern A

1st son after the father's father
2nd son after the mother's father
3rd son after the father
4th son after the father's father's father
5th son after the mother's father's father
6th son after the father's mother's father
7th son after the mother's mother's father

1st daughter after the mother's mother
2nd daughter after the father's mother
3rd daughter after the mother
4th daughter after the father's father's mother
5th daughter after the mother's father's mother
6th daughter after the father's mother's mother
7th daughter after the mother's mother's mother

Pattern B

The pattern B for the sons is the same as the above but this pattern
for daughters was different

1st daughter after the father's mother
2nd daughter after the mother's mother
3rd daughter after the mother
4th daughter after the mother's father's mother
5th daughter after the father's father's mother

Pattern C

1st son after the father's father
2nd son after the mother's father
3rd son after the father's oldest brother
4th son after the father

1st daughter after the father's mother
2nd daughter after the mother's mother
3rd daughter after the mother's oldest sister
4th daughter after the mother

Whenever a duplicate name occurred in these patterns, the next name
in the series was used. If a child died in infancy the name was often
reused for the next child of the same gender. A rare twist occurred
sometimes. A child's name would be reused when a spouse died and the
surviving spouse remarried and had more children with the next spouse. I
found this happened when a spouse had children in Germany and then his
spouse died. He left his children behind in Germany, possibly with the
grandparents, and then emigrated to Pennsylvania. Sometime after arrival
he remarried and named his eldest son born in Pennsylvania by his new
spouse with the same name as the son still living in Germany. This
results in two adult children with the same name.

If you are lucky enough to find a family with a lot of children, who
strictly followed one of these naming patterns, then it may give you
useful clues to determining the possible names of family members in
earlier generations.

5. An "in", added to the end of a name, such as Anna Maria Kerchnerin,
is a Germanic language name ending suffix denoting that the person is
female. Thus the correct spelling of the last name in the example would
be Kerchner, not Kerchnerin.

6. An "er" or "ner", added to a surname based on the name of something,
denoted that the person worked with that object or at that occupation,
if the main portion of the name was an object or an occupation, or that
the person was from that geographic location or city, if the main portion
of the name was a geographic location. Examples: Forst is German for
a forest, thus Forster is one who worked in a forest or with woodlands
or was from a forest. Berlin is a city in Germany, thus Berliner is one
who is from Berlin. Since English is a Germanic rooted language we do
the same thing in English, i.e., Paint(er), Garden(er), New York(er).

The suffixes mentioned in 5. and 6. above are compounded in many
cases. The nouns Kirche and Kerche are German words for church. Thus for
the surname spelled in an early record as Kerchnerin, i.e., Kerch(ner)(in)
we have a family name which means a person who worked in or near a church,
and this particular person is female.

7. Frequently the secular name given to the child was also the same as the
secular given name of one of the baptismal sponsors for the child. Said
baptismal sponsors frequently were close relatives but also could be
close and trusted friends and neighbors.

8. In the last half of the 19th century after the first and middle name
naming convention switched to the way it is today, some families gave all
the children the same middle name, which was often the maiden name of the
mother of the children. This same middle name, which if it was a surname,
could also be that of a famous patriot, such as Benjamin Franklin or
George Washington. But, if all the children had the same middle name,
this could be a clue to the maiden name of their mother.

I hope that the above information will be of assistance to individuals
researching 18th Century Pennsylvania-German names and records.

Sorry, but I cannot give you specific advice or answer questions about
individual German names. For information on specific names consult one
of the following excellent books.

For additional information on "German-American Names" consult the book
by that name written by Professor George F. Jones. See link below.

For additional information on German names, consult the 1967 book written
by Hans Bahlow. The English version titled "Dictionary of German Names"
was translated by Edda Gentry. It was published in 1993 by the Max Kade
Institute for German-American Studies, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison WI. See link below.


More ...

19TH CENTURY NAMING PATTERNS:
First son: named for his paternal grandfather.
Second son: named for his maternal grandfather.
Third son: named after father or father's paternal grandfather.
Fourth son: named after father's oldest brother or mother's paternal grandfather.
Fifth son: named after mother's eldest brother or father's material grandfather.
Sixth son: named after father's second oldest brother or for mother's
           maternal grandfather.

First dau: named for maternal grandmother.
Second dau: named for her paternal grandmother.
Third dau: named after mother or for mother's maternal grandmother.
Fourth dau: named after mother's oldest sister or for father's paternal grandmother.
Fifth dau: named after father's eldest sister or for mother's paternal grandmother.
Sixth dau: named after mother's second oldest sister or for father's
           paternal grandmother.

With people being what they are, there were all sorts of variations, some
covered by rules and some by family decision. It was customary to name
the next daughter/son born within a second marriage for the deceased
husband/wife. If a father died before his child was born, the child
was often named for him. If a mother died in childbirth, that child,
if a girl, was usually named for the mother. Another child was commonly
named for a child who had died within the family.

DUTCH NAMING PATTERNS:
The custom was that the lst son be named for paternal grandfather; 2nd
son named for his maternal grandfather; lst daughter for her maternal
grandmother; 2nd daughter for her paternal grandmother. If 4 children
were born then all 4 grandparents are known.

GERMAN NAMING PATTERNS:
The custom of Germans was to give, at baptism, two names. The first was
a spiritual or a saint's name in honor of a favorite saint. In my own
German family, I see Johann Adam, Johann George, Johann Jacob Hetzel and
some favorite female names were Anna Barbara and Anna Margaret Hetzel,
all within the same family! The second or middle name was the name the
person was known by within the family.

It was common practice in some German families to name the first born
son after the child's paternal grandfather and the second born son after
the maternal grandfather.

The suffix "in" or "en", added to the end of a name, such as Anna Maria
Hetzelin denoted female, often an unmarried female.

The definitive URL for German patterns is by Kerchner 18th Century
Pennsylvania German Naming Patterns

SCOTCH NAMING PATTERNS:
According to the book "In Search of Scottish Ancestry" the general
naming pattern in Scotland was to name: The eldest son after the paternal
grandfather.  The second son after the maternal grandfather.  The third
after the father.  The oldest daughter after the maternal grandmother.
The second daughter after the paternal grandmother.  The third daughter
after the mother.

One variation of above was for the eldest son to be named after the
mother's father and the eldest daughter after the father's mother.

Since given names change over the years someone doing research on their
line would need to know the approximate time period when their ancestor
was born and in what country.

END


