Subject: Established Church in New Jersey

BEGIN

From: arkydave@aol.com <arkydave@aol.com>
Date: Oct 3, 2005 9:56 AM

The history of New Jersey is one of basic religious tolerance, but tempered
by the contemporary debates that Europe was experiencing at the same time.
The early settlers of NJ were Dutch, who through the Union of Utrecht in
the late 1500s expressed religious freedom in the Dutch provinces. However,
this practice was challenged almost every decade by those who thought that
uniformity brought strength, and diversity ruin. Thus early New Amsterdam
followed the general Dutch precept of religious tolerance, but acting
leaders, such as Stuyvesant, practiced religious bigotry, especially
against Jews and Quakers. However, compared to Virginia and New England,
New Amsterdam was relatively tolerant. There was an over-riding principal
that the local community should support whatever religious institution was
in the community. Thus, although later governors of NJ (English) continued
to support a basic religious freedom doctrine, local leaders could and
sometimes did insist on support for the local church.

New Sweden did not have the same basic religious tolerance as a policy,
but its reformed tradition was somewhat tolerant of other protestant
sects. New Sweden also had difficulty in retaining ministers throughout its
short history, but the Swedish church was "state supported" when they could
get a minister. But these ministers were established in what would become
Pennsylvania and Delaware. No Swedish churches (of that I am currently aware)
were formed in NJ until after the colony was taken over by the Dutch.

The Dutch Reformed Church continued to be strong in NJ throughout the 18th
century, and Rutgers College was founded in part to train and provide
ministers in that sect. Similarly, Princeton was founded to train and
provide ministers in the Presbyterian sect. I don't believe that either of
these two institutions received tax revenue. The Quakers, despite early
strength in terms of population percentage, through their toleration
policies slowly became a minority, as dissident groups flocked to the
colony. Early Burlington did have an anti-catholic bias prior to 1700 (see
the controversy over the Tatum property) but made no overt actions against
catholics. Remember, the Duke of York (future James II), who for a short time
"owned" NJ, was catholic, and it is assumed that his two ardent supporters,
Carteret and Berkeley, were at least tolerant of catholicism.

Official support for any particular church remained local, and was never
again made part of the central government after New Sweden was conquered
by the Dutch in 1655. Communities that moved down from New England,
especially into Long Island prior to 1664, and into New Jersey after 1664,
often brought a reformed minister with them. When the town was laid out,
there was usually a "glebe" set off to support the minister. This was the
extent of "community support" for a particular church after 1664. Quaker
communities, since they had no ministers, did not set aside land for such
support, although they did set aside Burlington Island, whose rents would
support the local school system.

As NJ developed into a patchwork quilt of differing religious groups,
congregational support for individual churches became the norm. The
establishment of Church of England (Episcopal) congregations did not lead
(as far as I am aware) to any broad-based tax support of that sect, although
it was the official church for England. Royal governors did heavily support
the C of E churches through individual giving, and since much of their
wealth came from the citizens in some form, so one could claim that there
was some governmental support for the C of E churches, but by and large,
New Jersey throughout the colonial period retained the general religious
tolerance and lack of state support that it inherited from early New
Netherland. The new state constitution of 1776 made the policy official,
and the adoption of the Constitution in 1783 made it a federal policy.

David C. Mudge
Supervising Environmental Specialist
NJ Department of Transportation
(609) 530-2987

END

