QUAKER MARRIAGES

BEGIN

From Jerry Richmond, Fidonet Genealogy Conference, 1995

Members had to appear before the Monthly Meeting and publicly state their
marriage intentions at two Monthly Meetings in a row. Following the first
appearance, a committee would be appointed to investigate the "clearness"
of the individuals to marry. If an impediment was found, the couple were
not permitted to marry. Usually a couple would be privately advised not to
make the attempt to "pass the meeting" if the impediment was well known or
obvious. In this instance they would quietly get married by a magistrate
then come & condemn their misconduct of "marriage contrary to discipline"
(mcd). Following the 2nd declaration of intentions, if no impediments were
found, the couple would be "liberated to marry" or allowed their freedom
to accomplish the marriage.

The actual marriage ceremony was solemnized in either a public or private
Meeting. According to Discipline, the gathering together of at least 12
Friends was sufficient to constitute a legal Meeting. One thus finds that
document, peculiar to Quaker weddings, the marriage certificate signed by
AT LEAST 12 witnesses. The signatures are usually arranged in 3 columns with
the place of honor reserved for the fathers of the bride & groom at the top
of the rightmost column, immediately beneath the signatures of the groom &
the bride.

One should assume that, without better information, the majority of marriage
ceremonies were held the same day or the day following the liberation with
some held within, at most, the week following. The marriage certificates
were recorded in a separate book kept by the Monthly Meeting. Additionally,
the fact that the marriage occurred was recorded in the minutes at the next
Monthly Meeting. The following is the order of precedent used in establishing
the date of marriage (best to worst):

1 - Date of marriage ceremony

2 - Date of liberation to marry (within 0 to 7 days of event)

3 - Date of 2nd declaration of intention (0 to 14 days before)

4 - Date reported married in minutes of following MM (might be as much
    as 3 weeks after the event)

5 - Date of 1st declaration of intention (4 to 6 weeks before)

In the compiled genealogies, a comment is given for dates determined from
methods 2 thru 5. If the marriage book is still extant, Hinshaw & Heiss give
the ceremony date from the certificate. If not the following abbreviations
are used:

altm - at liberty to marry (2)

ltm - liberated to marry (2)

glm - granted liberty to marry (2)

dmi - declared marriage intentions (5)

dmist - declared marriage intentions second time (3)

rmt - reported married to (4)

rm - reported married (4)

Impediments to marriage:

- Intended spouse was a non-member

- Previous engagement to marry another individual

- Moral turpitude (which I imagine would include being already pregnant at
  the time of contemplating marriage)

- Close relationship (1st cousins forbidden to marry)

- Less than one year since death of previous spouse With the high mortality
  rate, particularly in childbirth, there were many second marriages
  in the early years. If a man lost his wife and had a brood of young
  children to raise, some perhaps still babies, waiting a year was not
  always practical. Even amongst the families that were deeply devoted
  Quakers, the majority of second marriages were performed by a Justice
  of the Peace. For those in their middle years that remarried in Meeting,
  waiting two years or more appeared to be the norm. Having seen a number
  of situations in which a marriage occurred as close as possible to the
  2 year anniversary of the previous spouse's decease, the Discipline may
  have called for a 2 year wait in some areas for a time

Inference of a marriage:

dis mcd/mou - disownment for mcd/mou usually occurred 3-6 months after
the fact; thus taking the disownment date to be the marriage date as
some researchers have done is erroneous. I have shown these as inferred
marriages with the approximate year only. The place is shown as the county
in which the MM is located unless better information is known respecting
the bride's county of residence. I have tried to "improve" these dates as
much as possible with dates from the IGI when available.

rept mcd/mou - the PM to which the party belonged reported that the
marriage in fact occurred & that the couple are publicly acknowledged to
be married. This should be treated similarly to the dis mcd/mou but with a
timeframe 2-5 months after the event. At the next MM one of the following
occurred:

(1) chm mcd/mou - condemn his/her misconduct of mcd/mou, or con mcd/mou -
condemn (his/her) mcd/mou, either of which means the individual signed
a statement acknowledging their misconduct & (optionally) requesting the
meeting's forebearance & to be restored in membership

(2) dis - disowned, treating with the individual failed to yield a
condemnation of misconduct

(3) nothing - from all appearances person continued a member and in many
cases is fairly soon granted a certificate to another meeting. One can
assume a condemnation of misconduct was obtained but no notation was made
in the minutes or the extractor overlooked it. In circumstances of charged
misconduct OTHER than marriage one would assume that charges were dropped
for lack of substance. In cases of marriage, however, one should NEVER
conclude that the charged marriage did not occur.

chm mcd/mou or con mcd/mou - with no preliminary, one of the following
scenarios is applicable generally:

(1) the couple marr.out because of a known impediment & the event follows
the marriage by only a few weeks

(2) the couple marr.out because they did not want to bother with the MM's
red tape (most 2nd marriages fall into this category) & the event follows
the marriage by 1-2 months

(3) the couple married 5-10 years before & are suddenly struck with maturity;
usually followed fairly rapidly by the intervening children being received
on request; if one partner was a non-member they are usually received on
request in the same general timeframe

(4) the couple married 0-10 years before & want to migrate & be received
in good-standing at their new MM; the event is following closely by a
grant of certificate in case (3) or (4), one or both partners would have
been originally disowned but the record of the earlier event may not be
extant. In case (3) & (4), if no better information is available, the
marriage can be inferred to have occurred in the year preceding the year
of birth of the eldest child.

dis - disowned and no reason given, prior to 1800, the chances are at least
50% that it was for marr.out. One can infer a marriage with near certainty
if the person was in the 20-22 age range.

END

