From the Internet ...

BEGIN

"What Happened to the Signers?"

Five signers were captured by the British and brutally tortured as
traitors. Nine fought in the War for Independence and died from wounds
or from hardships they suffered. Two lost their sons in the Continental
Army. Another two had sons captured. At least a dozen of the fifty-six had
their homes pillaged and burned.

What kind of men were they? Twenty-five were lawyers or jurists. Eleven
were merchants.  Nine were farmers or large plantation owners.  One was
a teacher, one a musician, and one a printer. These were men of means and
education, yet they signed the Declaration of Independence, knowing full
well that the penalty could be death if they were captured.

In the face of the advancing British Army, the Continental Congress fled
from Philadelphia to Baltimore on December 12, 1776. It was an especially
anxious time for John Hancock, the President, as his wife had just given
birth to a baby girl. Due to the complications stemming from the trip to
Baltimore, the child lived only a few months.

William Ellery's signing at the risk of his fortune proved only too
realistic. In December 1776, during three days of British occupation of
Newport, Rhode Island, Ellery's house was burned, and all his property
destroyed.

Richard Stockton, a New Jersey State Supreme Court Justice, had rushed back
to his estate near Princeton after signing the Declaration of Independence to
find that his wife and children were living like refugees with friends. They
had been betrayed by a Tory sympathizer who also revealed Stockton's own
whereabouts.  British troops pulled him from his bed one night, beat him
and threw him in jail where he almost starved to death. When he was finally
released, he went home to find his estate had been looted, his possessions
burned, and his horses stolen. Judge Stockton had been so badly treated
in prison that his health was ruined and he died before the war's end. His
surviving family had to live the remainder of their lives off charity.

Carter Braxton was a wealthy planter and trader. One by one his ships were
captured by the British navy. He loaned a large sum of money to the American
cause; it was never paid back. He was forced to sell his plantations and
mortgage his other properties to pay his debts.

Thomas McKean was so hounded by the British that he had to move his family
almost constantly. He served in the Continental Congress without pay,
and kept his family in hiding.  Vandals or soldiers or both looted the
properties of Clymer, Hall, Harrison, Hopkinson and Livingston. Seventeen
lost everything they owned.

Thomas Heyward, Jr., Edward Rutledge and Arthur Middleton, all of South
Carolina, were captured by the British during the Charleston Campaign in
1780. They were kept in dungeons at the St. Augustine Prison until exchanged
a year later.

At the Battle of Yorktown, Thomas Nelson, Jr. noted that the British
General Cornwallis had taken over the family home for his headquarters.
Nelson urged General George Washington to open fire on his own home. This
was done, and the home was destroyed. Nelson later died bankrupt.

Francis Lewis also had his home and properties destroyed. The British
jailed his wife for two months, and that and other hardships from the war
so affected her health that she died only two years later.

"Honest John" Hart, a New Jersey farmer, was driven from his wife's bedside
when she was near death. Their thirteen children fled for their lives. Hart's
fields and his gristmill were laid waste. For over a year he eluded capture
by hiding in nearby forests.  He never knew where his bed would be the next
night and often slept in caves.  When he finally returned home, he found
that his wife had died, his children disappeared, and his farm and stock
were completely destroyed. Hart himself died in 1779 without ever seeing
any of his family again.

Such were the stories and sacrifices typical of those who risked everything
to sign the Declaration of Independence. These men were not wild-eyed,
rabble-rousing ruffians.  They were soft-spoken men of means and
education. They had security, but they valued liberty more.

Standing tall, straight, and unwavering, they pledged:

"For the support of this declaration, with a firm reliance on the protection
of the Divine Providence, we mutually pledge to each other, our lives,
our fortunes, and our sacred honor."

END



According to www.snopes.com ...

BEGIN

Claim:  Essay outlines the fates of the signers of the Declaration of
        Independence.
Status:  Some true; some false.
Example:  [Collected on the Internet, 1999]

THE PRICE THEY PAID

Have you ever wondered what happened to the 56 men who signed the Declaration
of Independence?  Five signers were captured by the British as traitors and
tortured before they died.  Twelve had their homes ransacked and burned.
Two lost their sons serving in the Revolutionary Army, another had two
sons captured.  Nine of the 56 fought and died from wounds or hardships
of the Revolutionary War.  They signed and they pledged their lives, their
fortunes, and their sacred honor.  What kind of men were they?

Twenty-four were lawyers and jurists. Eleven were merchants, nine were
farmers and large plantation owners; men of means, well educated. But they
signed the Declaration of Independence knowing full well that the penalty
would be death if they were captured.

Carter Braxton of Virginia, a wealthy planter and trader, saw his ships
swept from the seas by the British Navy. He sold his home and properties
to pay his debts, and died in rags.

Thomas McKeam was so hounded by the British that he was forced to move
his family almost constantly. He served in the Congress without pay,
and his family was kept in hiding. His possessions were taken from him,
and poverty was his reward.

Vandals or soldiers looted the properties of Dillery, Hall, Clymer, Walton,
Gwinnett, Heyward, Ruttledge, and Middleton.

At the battle of Yorktown, Thomas Nelson, Jr., noted that the British
General Cornwallis had taken over the Nelson home for his headquarters. He
quietly urged General George Washington to open fire. The home was destroyed,
and Nelson died bankrupt.

Francis Lewis had his home and properties destroyed. The enemy jailed his
wife, and she died within a few months.  John Hart was driven from his wife's
bedside as she was dying. Their 13 children fled for their lives. His fields
and his gristmill were laid to waste. For more than a year, he lived in
forests and caves, returning home to find his wife dead and his children
vanished. A few weeks later, he died from exhaustion and a broken heart.
Norris and Livingston suffered similar fates.

Such were the stories and sacrifices of the American Revolution. These were
not wild-eyed, rabble-rousing ruffians.  They were soft-spoken men of means
and education. They had security, but they valued liberty more.  Standing talk
straight, and unwavering, they pledged: "For the support of this declaration,
with firm reliance on the protection of the divine providence, we mutually
pledge to each other, our lives, our fortunes, and our sacred honor."

They gave you and me a free and independent America. The history books
never told you a lot about what happened in the Revolutionary War. We didn't
fight just the British. We were British subjects at that time and we fought
our own government!  Some of us take these liberties so much for granted,
but we shouldn't.  So, take a few minutes while enjoying your 4th of July
Holiday and silently thank these patriots. It's not much to ask for the
price they paid. Remember: Freedom is never free!

I hope you will show your support by please sending this to as many people
as you can. It's time we get the word out that patriotism is NOT a sin,
and the Fourth of July has more to it than beer, picnics, and baseball games.

Origins:  In the waning years of their lengthy lives, former presidents
(and Founding Fathers) John Adams and Thomas Jefferson reconciled the
political differences that had separated them for many years and carried on
a voluminous correspondence. One of the purposes behind their exchange of
letters was to set the record straight regarding the events of the American
Revolution, for as author Joseph J. Ellis noted, they (particularly Adams,
whom history would not treat nearly as kindly as Jefferson) were keenly aware
of the "distinction between history as experienced and history as remembered":

Adams realized that the act of transforming the American Revolution
into history placed a premium on selecting events and heroes that fit
neatly into a dramatic formula, thereby distorting the more tangled and
incoherent experience that participants actually making the history felt
at the time. Jefferson's drafting of the Declaration of Independence
was a perfect example of such dramatic distortions. The Revolution
in this romantic rendering became one magical moment of inspiration,
leading inexorably to the foregone conclusion of American independence.
Evidently Adams was right: So great is our need for simplified, dramatic
events and heroes that the even the real-life biographies of the fifty-six
men who risked their lives to publicly declare American independence are no
longer compelling enough. Through multiple versions of pieces like the one
quoted above, their lives have been repeatedly embellished with layers of
fanciful fiction to make for a better story. As we often do, we'll try here
to strip away those accumulated layers of fiction and get down to whatever
kernel of truth may lie underneath:

Five signers were captured by the British as traitors and tortured before
they died.

It is true that five signers of the Declaration of Independence were captured
by the British during the course of he Revolutionary War. However, none of
them died while a prisoner, and four of them were taken into custody not
because they were considered "traitors" due to their status as signatories
to that document, but because they were captured as prisoners of war while
actively engaged in military operations against the British: George Walton
was captured after being wounded while commanding militia at the Battle
of Savannah in December 1778, and Thomas Heyward, Jr., Arthur Middleton,
and Edward Rutledge (three of the four Declaration of Independence signers
from South Carolina) were taken prisoner at the Siege of Charleston in
May in 1780. Although they endured the ill treatment typically afforded
to prisoners of war during their captivity (prison conditions were quite
deplorable at the time), they were not tortured, nor is there evidence that
they were treated more harshly than other wartime prisoners who were not
also signatories to the Declaration. Moreover, all four men were eventually
exchanged or released; had they been considered traitors by the British,
they would have been hanged.  Richard Stockton of New Jersey was the only
signer taken prisoner specifically because of his status as a signatory to
the Declaration, "dragged from his bed by night" by local Tories after he
had evacuated his family from New Jersey, and imprisoned in New York City's
infamous Provost Jail like a common criminal. However, Stockton was also the
only one of the fifty-six signers who violated the pledge to support the
Declaration of Independence and each other with "our Lives, our Fortunes,
and our sacred Honor," securing a pardon and his release from imprisonment
by recanting his signature on the Declaration and signing an oath swearing
his allegiance to George III.

Twelve had their homes ransacked and burned.

It is true that a number of signers saw their homes and property occupied,
ransacked, looted, and vandalized by the British (and even in some cases
by the Americans). However, as we discuss in more detail below, this
activity was a common (if unfortunate) part of warfare. Signers' homes
were not specifically targeted for destruction like many other Americans,
their property was subject to seizure when it fell along the path of a war
being waged on the North American continent.

Two lost their sons serving in the Revolutionary Army, another had two
sons captured.

Abraham Clark of New Jersey saw two of his sons captured by the British
and incarcerated on the prison ship Jersey.  John Witherspoon, also of New
Jersey, saw his eldest son, James, killed in the Battle of Germantown in
October 1777.  If there was a second signer of the Declaration whose son
was killed while serving in the Continental Army, we have yet to find him.

Nine of the 56 fought and died from wounds or hardships of the Revolutionary
War.

This statement is quite misleading as phrased. Nine signers died during
the course of the Revolutionary War, but none of them died from wounds
or hardships inflicted on them by the British. (Indeed, several of the
nine didn't even take part in the war.) Only one signer, Button Gwinnett
of Georgia, died from wounds, and those were received not at the hands of
the British, but of a fellow officer with whom he duelled in May 1777.

Carter Braxton of Virginia, a wealthy planter and trader, saw his ships
swept from the seas by the British Navy. He sold his home and properties
to pay his debts, and died in rags.

Before the American Revolution, Carter Braxton was possessed of a considerable
fortune through inheritance and favorable marriages. While still in his teens
he inherited the family estate, which included a flourishing Virginia tobacco
plantation, upon the death of his father. He married a wealthy heiress who
died when he was just 21, and within a few years he had remarried, this time
to the daughter of the Receiver of Customs in Virginia for the King.  As a
delegate representing Virginia in the Continental Congress in 1776, he was
one of the minority of delegates reluctant to support an American declaration
of independence, a move which he viewed at the time as too dangerous:

[Independence] is in truth a delusive Bait which men inconsiderably catch
at, without knowing the hook to which it is affixed . . . America is too
defenceless a State for the declaration, having no alliance with a naval
Power nor as yet any Fleet of consequence of her own to protect that trade
which is so essential to the prosecution of the War, without which I know
we cannot go on much longer.

Braxton invested his wealth in commercial enterprises, particularly shipping,
and he endured severe financial reversals during the Revolutionary War
when many of the ships in which he held interest were either appropriated
by the British government (because they were British-flagged) or were
sunk or captured by the British. He was not personally targeted for ruin
because he had signed the Declaration of Independence, however; he suffered
grievous financial losses because most of his wealth was tied up in shipping,
"that trade which is so essential to the prosecution of the War" and which
was therefore a prime military target for the British. Even if he hadn't
signed the Declaration of Independence, Braxton's ships would have been
casualties of the war just the same.  Although Braxton did lose property
during the war and had to sell off assets (primarily landholdings) to cover
the debts incurred by the loss of his ships, he recouped much of that money
after the war but subsequently lost it again through his own ill-advised
business dealings. His fortune was considerably diminished in his later
years, but he did not by any stretch of the imagination "die in rags."

Thomas McKeam was so hounded by the British that he was forced to move
his family almost constantly. He served in the Congress without pay,
and his family was kept in hiding. His possessions were taken from him,
and poverty was his reward.

As one biography describes Thomas McKean (not "McKeam"):

Thomas McKean might just represent an ideal study of how far political
engagement can be carried by one man. One can scarcely believe the number
of concurrent offices and duties this man performed during the course of
his long career. He served three states and many more cities and county
governments, often performing duties in two or more jurisdictions, even
while engaged in federal office.

Among his many offices, McKean was a delegate to the Continental Congress
(of which he later served as president), President of Delaware, Chief Justice
of Pennsylvania, and Governor of Pennsylvania. The above-quoted statement
regarding his being "hounded" by the British during the Revolutionary War
is probably based upon a letter he wrote to his friend John Adams in 1777,
in which he described how he had been "hunted like a fox by the enemy,
compelled to remove my family five times in three months, and at last fixed
them in a little log-house on the banks of the Susquehanna, but they were
soon obliged to move again on account of the incursions of the Indians."
However, it is problematic to assert that McKean's treatment was due to
his being a signer of the Declaration of Independence. (His name does not
appear on printed copies of that document authenticated in January 1777,
so it is likely he did not affix his name to it until later.) If he was
targeted by the British, it was quite possibly because he also served in
a military capacity as a volunteer leader of militia. In any case, McKean
did not end up in "poverty," as the estate he left behind when he died in
1817 was described as consisting of "stocks, bonds, and huge land tracts
in Pennsylvania."

Vandals or soldiers looted the properties of Dillery, Hall, Clymer, Walton,
Gwinnett, Heyward, Ruttledge, and Middleton.

First of all, this passage has a couple of misspellings: the signers
referred to are William Ellery (not "Dillery") and Edward Rutledge (not
"Ruttledge"). Secondly, this sentence is misleading in that it implies
a motive that was most likely not present (i.e., these men's homes were
looted because they had been signers of the Declaration of Independence).

The need to forage for supplies in enemy territory has long been a part of
warfare, and so it was far from uncommon for British soldiers in the field
to appropriate such material from private residences during the American
Revolution. (Not only were homes used as sources of food, livestock, and
other necessary supplies, but larger houses were also taken over and used to
quarter soldiers or to serve as headquarters for officers.) In some cases,
even American forces took advantage of the local citizenry to provision
themselves. Given that many more prominent American revolutionaries who
were also signers of the Declaration of Independence (e.g., Samuel Adams,
John Hancock, Benjamin Franklin, James Wilson, Benjamin Rush, Robert Morris)
had homes in areas that were occupied by the British during the war, yet
those homes were not looted or vandalized, it's hard to make the case that
the men named above were specifically targeted for vengeance by the British
rather than unfortunate victims whose property fell in the path of an armed
conflict being waged on American soil.

It's also a common misconception that the signing of the Declaration of
Independence was the event that triggered the Revolutionary War, so the
signers were directly responsible for whatever misfortunes befell them (and
their fellow Americans) as a result of that war. But the war actually began
more than a year before the signing of the Declaration of Independence:
Revolutionary events involving armed conflict, such as the battles of
Lexington and Concord, the seizure of Fort Ticonderoga by Ethan Allen and
his "Green Mountain Boys," the Battle of Bunker Hill, and the capture of
Montreal by General Richard Montgomery, all took place in 1775.

At the battle of Yorktown, Thomas Nelson, Jr., noted that the British
General Cornwallis had taken over the Nelson home for his headquarters. He
quietly urged General George Washington to open fire. The home was destroyed,
and Nelson died bankrupt.

The tale about Thomas Nelson's urging or suggesting the bombardment of his
own house is one of several Revolutionary War legends whose truth may never
be known. Several versions of this story exist, one of which (as referenced
above) holds that Nelson encouraged George Washington to shell his Yorktown
home after British Major General Charles Cornwallis had taken it over to
use as his headquarters in 1781:

Cornwallis had turned the home of Thomas Nelson, who had succeeded Jefferson
as governor of Virginia, into his headquarters. Nelson, a signed of the
Declaration of Independence, had led three Virginia brigades, or 3,000
men, to Yorktown and, when the shelling of the town was about to begin,
urged Washington to bombard his own house. And that is where Washington,
with his experienced surveyor's eye, reputedly pointed the gun for the first
(and singularly fatal) allied shot. Legend has it that the shell went right
through a window and landed at the dinner table where some British officers,
including the British commissary general, had just sat down to dine. The
general was killed and several others wounded as it burst among their plates.

Other versions of the story have Nelson directing the Marquis de Lafayette
to train French artillery on his home:

The story goes that the new Virginia Governor Thomas Nelson (who'd been held
at Yorktown but released under a flag of truce) was with American forces that
day. Lafayette invited Nelson to be present when Captain Thomas Machin's
battery first opened fire, as both a compliment and knowing Nelson lived
in Yorktown and would know the localities in the riverport area. "To what
particular spot," Lafayette reportedly asked Nelson, "would your Excellency
direct that we should point the cannon." Nelson replied, "There, to that
house. It is mine, and . . . it is the best one in the town. There you will
be almost certain to find Lord Cornwallis and the British headquarters."
"A simultaneous discharge of all the guns in the line," Joseph Martin
wrote, was "followed [by] French troops accompanying it with 'Huzza for the
Americans.'" Sounding much like the Nelson legend, Martin's account added
that "the first shell sent from our batteries entered an elegant house
formerly owned or occupied by the Secretary of State under the British,
and burned directly over a table surrounded by a large party of British
officers at dinner, killing and wounding a number of them."

Still other accounts maintain this legend is a conflation of two separate
events: Thomas Nelson, acting as commander in chief of the Virginia militia,
ordered a battery to open fire on his uncle's home, where Cornwallis was
then ensconced. Later, Nelson supposedly made a friendly bet with French
artillerists in which he challenged them to hit his home, one of the more
prominent landmarks in Yorktown.

Whatever the truth, the Nelson home was certainly not "destroyed"
as claimed. The house stands to this day as part of Colonial National
Historical Park, and the National Park Service's description of it notes
only that "the southeast face of the residence does show evidence of damage
from cannon fire."

Francis Lewis had his home and properties destroyed. The enemy jailed his
wife, and she died within a few months.

Francis Lewis represented New York in the Continental Congress, and shortly
after he signed the Declaration of Independence his Long Island estate
was raided by the British, possibily as retaliation for his having been a
signatory to that document. While Lewis was in Philadelphia attending to
congressional matters, his wife was taken prisoner by the British after
disregarding an order for citizens to evacuate Long Island. Mrs. Lewis was
held for several months before being exchanged for the wives of British
officials captured by the Americans. Although her captivity was undoubtedly
a hardship, she had already been in poor health for some time and died a
few years (not months) later.

John Hart was driven from his wife's bedside as she was dying. Their 13
children fled for their lives. His fields and his gristmill were laid
to waste. For more than a year, he lived in forests and caves, returning
home to find his wife dead and his children vanished. A few weeks later,
he died from exhaustion and a broken heart.

John Hart's New Jersey farm was looted in the course of the Revolutionary
War, and he did have to remain in hiding for a while afterwards. However,
the claim that he was "driven from his [dying] wife's bedside" as his
"13 children fled for his lives" is dramatic fiction. The British overran
the area of New Jersey where he resided in late November of 1776, but
his wife had already died on 8 October, and most of their children were
adults by then. He also did not die "from exhaustion and a broken heart"
a mere "few weeks" after emerging from hiding ¿ he was twice re-elected
to the Continental Congress, served as Speaker of the New Jersey assembly,
and invited the American army to encamp on his New Jersey farmland in June
1778 before succumbing to kidney stones in May 1779.

Norris and Livingston suffered similar fates.

Lewis Morris (not Norris) indeed saw his Westchester County, New York,
home taken over in 1776 and used as a barracks for soldiers, and the horses
and livestock from his farm commandeered by military personnel . . . of the
Continental Army. Shortly afterwards, his home fell to the British, but Morris
and his wife reclaimed the property and restored their home after the war.

Philip Livingston lost several properties to the British occupation of New
York and sold off others to support the war effort, and he did not recover
them because he died suddenly in 1778, before the end of the war.  What should
we take from all of this? The signers of the Declaration of Independence did
take a huge risk in daring to put their names on a document that repudiated
their government, and they had every reason to believe at the time that they
might well be hanged for having done so. That was a courageous act we should
indeed remember and honor on the Fourth of July amidst our "beer, picnics,
and baseball games." But we should also not lose sight of the fact that
many men (and women) other than the fifty-six signers of the Declaration
of Independence ¿ some famous and most not ¿ risked and sacrificed much
(including their lives) to support the revolutionary cause. The hardships and
losses endured by many Americans during the struggle for independence were
not visited upon the signers alone, nor were they any less ruinous for having
befallen people whose names are not immortalized on a piece of parchment.

Last updated:  28 June 2005
The URL for this page is http://www.snopes.com/history/american/pricepaid.asp
Urban Legends Reference Pages © 1995-2007
by Barbara and David P. Mikkelson
this material may not be reproduced without permission.

Citations:

Bailyn, Bernard.  The Ideological Origins of the American Revolution.
Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press, 1992.  ISBN 0-674-44302-0.

Bobrick, Benson.  Angel in the Whirlwind: The Triumph of the American
Revolution.  New York: Simon & Schuster, 1997.  ISBN 0-684-81060-3.

Ellis, Joseph J.  Founding Brothers: The Revolutionary Generation.  New York:
Alfred A. Knopf, 2000.  ISBN 0-375-70524-4.

Ferris, Robert G.  Signers of the Declaration of Independence.  Flagstaff,
AZ: Interpretive Publications, 1982.  ISBN 0-936-47807-1.

Maier, Pauline.  American Scripture: Making the Declaration of Independence.
New York: Random House, 1997.  ISBN 0-679-77908-6.

Wills, Garry.  Inventing America: Jefferson's Declaration of Independence.
New York: Vintage Books, 1979.  ISBN 0-394-72735-5.

Wright, Mike.  What They Didn't Teach You About the American Revolution.
Presidio Press, 1999.  ISBN 0-891-41668-4.

END

