
paraphrasing from
https://files.nc.gov/ncdoa/documents/files/Sample%20Guide%20C-List%20of%20Primary%20Sources%20vs.%20Secondary%20Sources%20for%20Genealogical%20Documents.pdf

BEGIN

Primary Source (firsthand, an original record) - created by people who
actually witnessed or participated in an event and recorded that event
immediately.

- birth record
- marriage record
- divorce record
- death record
- land record & plat
- lease
- diplomas or certificates of degree
- military & pension record
- tax record
- family bible (if the events were recorded at the time they actually occurred)
- newspaper article (if the author witnessed the event and wrote the article shortly thereafter)
- probate record
- church record
- school record
- court record (civil & criminal)


Secondary Source: (secondhand, derivative record) - records that are created
some length of time after the event or for which information was supplied
by someone who was not an eyewitness to the event. A Secondary Source can
also be a person who was an eyewitness to the event but recalls it after
significant time passes.

- old letters
- books
- oral interviews
- transcriptions/translations
- indexes
- federal & state census information: censuses rely upon self-identification
- newspaper articles written after a significant time passes
- obituary
- tombstone photograph
- family histories or published genealogies
- Bible Records
- published county histories
- published biographical histories
- documented oral histories/interviews (interviews for modern period - not hearsay)
- personal papers (such as letters, diaries, journals, reunion records and manuscripts)
- vital records for events other than what they were written for (a death record would be considered a Primary Source for the death
  information it contains and a secondary source for the birth information it contains).

END



from https://libguides.umn.edu/FindResourcesbyFormat/primary-sources

BEGIN

Definitions:

Primary sources are original records created at the time historical
events occurred or well after events in the form of memoirs and oral
histories. Primary sources are distinguished from secondary sources, which
are produced some time after an event, and serve to analyze or interpret
primary sources.

END



from https://sccollege.edu/Library/Pages/primarysources.aspx

BEGIN

Identifying Primary and Secondary Resources

Sources of information are often categorized as primary or secondary
depending upon their originality.

Primary Sources

A primary source provides direct or firsthand evidence about an event, object,
person, or work of art.  Primary sources provide the original materials on
which other research is based and enable students and other researchers to
get as close as possible to what actually happened during a particular event
or time period.   Published materials can be viewed as primary resources if
they come from the time period that is being discussed, and were written or
produced by someone with firsthand experience of the event.  Often primary
sources reflect the individual viewpoint of a participant or observer.
Primary sources can be written or non-written (sound, pictures, artifacts,
etc.).  In scientific research, primary sources present original thinking,
report on discoveries, or share new information.

Examples of primary sources:

    Autobiographies and memoirs
    Diaries, personal letters, and correspondence
    Interviews, surveys, and fieldwork
    Internet communications on email, blogs, listservs, and newsgroups
    Photographs, drawings, and posters
    Works of art and literature
    Books, magazine and newspaper articles and ads published at the time
    Public opinion polls
    Speeches and oral histories
    Original documents (birth certificates, property deeds, trial transcripts)
    Research data, such as census statistics
    Official and unofficial records of organizations and government agencies
    Artifacts of all kinds, such as tools, coins, clothing, furniture, etc.
    Audio recordings, DVDs, and video recordings
    Government documents (reports, bills, proclamations, hearings, etc.)
    Patents
    Technical reports
    Scientific journal articles reporting experimental research results

Secondary Sources

Secondary sources describe, discuss, interpret, comment upon, analyze,
evaluate, summarize, and process primary sources.  A secondary source is
generally one or more steps removed from the event or time period and are
written or produced after the fact with the benefit of hindsight.  Secondary
sources often lack the freshness and immediacy of the original material.
On occasion, secondary sources will collect, organize, and repackage
primary source information to increase usability and speed of delivery,
such as an online encyclopedia.  Like primary sources, secondary materials
can be written or non-written (sound, pictures, movies, etc.).

Examples of secondary sources:

    Bibliographies
    Biographical works
    Reference books, including dictionaries, encyclopedias, and atlases
    Articles from magazines, journals, and newspapers after the event
    Literature reviews and review articles (e.g., movie reviews, book reviews)
    History books and other popular or scholarly books
    Works of criticism and interpretation
    Commentaries and treatises
    Textbooks
    Indexes and abstracts

END



from Marshall Edward Lake
<marshallelake@gmail.com>

BEGIN

In my mind, using the word Citation and the word Source has different
connotations.

A Source is the actual artifact, book, document, etc. from which the
information was obtained.

A Citation is an identification from where the information came.

i.e., if our information came from a birth certificate, for example, the
birth certificate would be a Source.  If our information came from another
researcher who said they got the information from a birth certificate, that
researcher would be the Citation.  We shouldn't use the birth certificate
as a Source since we didn't see the actual birth certificate.

END

