
New York/New Jersey
From http://www.negenealogy.com ...

BEGIN

After Henry Hudson's initial explorations of the Delaware River area, some
Dutch settlements were attempted in New Jersey as early as 1618 but were
soon abandoned because of real or imagined threats from the Lenni-Lenape (or
Delaware) original inhabitants. A more lasting settlement was made from 1638
to 1655 by the Swedes and Finns along the Delaware as part of New Sweden,
which continued to flourish although the Dutch eventually gained control
over this area and made it part of New Netherland. From 1660 to the end of
the century, many Dutch from New York established farms in northern New
Jersey. Throughout the colonial period, only the English outnumbered the
Dutch in New Jersey. When England conquered the Dutch in 1664 King Charles
II gave his brother, the Duke of York (later King James II), all of New
York and New Jersey. The duke in turn granted New Jersey to two of his
creditors, Lord John Berkeley and Sir George Carteret. The land was named
Nova Caesaria for the Isle of Jersey, Carteret's home. Within the year that
England took control there was a large influx of English from New England
and Long Island who, for want of more or better land, settled the East Jersey
towns of Elizabethtown, Middletown, Piscataway, Shrewsbury, and Woodbridge. A
year later, Newark was founded by migrants from New Jersey. In 1685 a large
group of Scots came to Perth Amboy, but they were not part of the great wave
of Ulster-Scots who in the 1720s began their immigration to the New World,
including New Jersey. For a brief period in 1673-74, the Dutch regained
control of New Jersey and New York, but it soon reverted back to the English.

The southern part of the state drew English Quakers, some of whom spilled
over from the Philadelphia area. They gained control of the southern part
when it was sold by Lord Berkeley to Quaker John Fenwick. In 1676 New Jersey
was divided into two provinces, East and West, controlled by proprietors,
with capitals at Perth Amboy and Burlington, respectively. William Penn,
a proprietor of both provinces, forced the setting of a boundary. It was
poorly surveyed but cut across the state such that all of the more settled
southern part fell in West Jersey. For two years beginning in April 1688,
New Jersey was, with New York, part of the Dominion of New England, but
no significant records of New Jersey seem to have been generated in its
capital of Boston. The proprietors of both provinces gave up their right
to rule in 1702 but continued to control first sales of the land, as they
still do today. New Jersey was then under united rule by the royal governor
of New York until 1738, after which she had her own royal governor.

Significant migrations and immigrations continued into the eighteenth
century. These included French Huguenots fleeing France, and Long Islanders
who settled at Cape May in the 1690s and Morris County in the 1730s. Many of
the Palatines who immigrated to New York in 1709 came to New Jersey, as did
Germans who entered through Philadelphia throughout the 1700s. Descendants
of some of these families migrated to northwestern New Jersey.

New Jersey was a major battleground during the Revolutionary War and
many American and British troops passed through, to and from New York and
Pennsylvania, all of which caused some destruction of records. Like New York,
New Jersey residents were quite divided by the war, and a large number of
Loyalists left for Canada.

Throughout the nineteenth century, the state continued to grow through
increased development of transportation, including the completion in 1834
of a canal connecting the Delaware and Raritan rivers that enabled faster
travel between Philadelphia and New York.  (Except for its 48-mile border
with New York, New Jersey is completely surrounded by water, which remains
one of its major modes of transportation.) This was also the time of the
coming of the railroads and eventually the roadways, which today make New
Jersey the major corridor between the northeast and the south. The 1800s
saw New Jersey develop industrially, starting with the establishment of
the nation's first factory town at what is today Paterson. New Jersey is
one of the more densely populated states in this country, with many of its
residents commuting to work in neighboring New York and Pennsylvania.

END



Date: Sun, 22 Feb 2004 14:49:54 -0800
From: Dane Coefer <danec@osfashland.org>
To: NJHUNTER-L@rootsweb.com
Subject: RE: [NJHUNTER] Gravesend -> Hunterdon Co

BEGIN

Several reasons for the exodus from New York.

#1 would be religious. When the English took over New Amsterdam they made
several concessions to religious tolerance. Over time, however, those
concessions were reduced. Trinity Church's founding in the 1690s was
followed by taxes to support the established church. Restrictions were
placed upon ministers of other faiths. In 1707, a Presbyterian minister
in New York was jailed for two months for preaching without a license,
while a year earlier the Governor (Cornbury) rejected what should have been
a rubber-stamp approval of a petition to recognize a new minister for the
Reformed Dutch Church at Flatbush. (He later approved the minister). Between
1700-1715 the migration of Dutch from New York greatly accelerated. Likely
the Gravesend Anabaptists had similar motivations.

#2 could be the end of the Proprietorship of New Jersey in 1702. Prior
to that time, much of the land traded in the area was speculative in
multi-thousand acre sections that were never occupied. After 1702, the sale
of smaller tracts, suitable for family farms, increased the desirability
of the region. Land became "cheaper" due to the smaller size of the tracts.

#3 could be population pressures. In pre-industrial America, the children of
large farm families did not move to the cities, but to new farmland. Many
of the early 1700 NY Wills list children residing in NJ. Early settlement
of the Millstone valley also led to further settlement upriver into Hunterdon.

#4 could perhaps be "cheap land." Cheap as compared to the expensive
developed land the settlers were selling behind them in New York and cheap
to the settlers who in many cases were affluent New Yorkers.

Other considerations would include stories of "the land of milk and honey"
from early migrants (and land speculators), the relative political freedom
resulting in the distance of the central government (NJ originally being
governed from New York)...

Dane Coefer 

END

