
From the Internet ...

BEGIN

Bavaria, Germany

Bavaria (German Bayern), state in southeastern Germany, bounded on the
north by the states of Thuringia and Saxony, on the northeast by the Czech
Republic, on the southeast and south by Austria, and on the west by the
states of Baden-Württemberg and Hesse. Munich is the capital and largest
city. Other important cities are Nuremberg, Augsburg, and Regensburg. Bavaria
is the largest state of Germany. It is drained by the Main River in the
northwest and by the Danube River and two of its tributaries, the Inn and
Isar rivers, in the southern and central regions. North of the Danube the
land is a rolling upland. Along the border with the Czech Republic is the
Bavarian Forest, which reaches an elevation of 1457 m (4780 ft). South of
the Danube the land is a rising upland cut by numerous river valleys. In
the extreme southern part of the state are the Bavarian Alps, the highest
mountains in Germany. Area, 70,546 sq km (27,238 sq mi); population (1990
estimate) 11,448,800.

The population, which is largely Roman Catholic, is engaged mainly in
agriculture. The chief crops are grains (wheat in the south, rye in the
north), sugar beets, potatoes, hops, and grapes and other fruits.  Cattle,
hogs, and horses are raised, and dairying is carried on in the foothills of
the Bavarian Alps. The forests yield a variety of wood products. Lignite,
granite, iron ore, and salt are mined. Bavaria has extensive hydroelectric
power, a key factor in its industrial growth.  Industry is concentrated in
Munich, one of the main transportation centers in Germany, and in Nuremberg
and Augsburg. In addition to the brewing of world-famous beer, industries
include the production of glass and ceramics, machinery, textiles and paper,
and optical and scientific equipment. Bavaria is noted for many monasteries
and baroque churches, picturesque castles, and universities, and tourism
is important to the state's economy.

Under the 1946 constitution, Bavaria has a cabinet government headed
by a minister-president and responsible to a popularly elected diet
(legislature). The state is divided into seven administrative districts.
Bavaria was conquered by the Romans in the 1st century BC and resettled
by Germanic tribes in the 5th and 6th centuries. It became a possession
of Charlemagne in 787 and was ruled by the Carolingian dynasty until the
10th century. In 1180 it passed to the Bavarian family of Wittelsbach.
During the Reformation Bavaria remained staunchly Roman Catholic and
was consequently ravaged by Protestant forces during the Thirty Years'
War (1618-1648). The fertile soil and strategic position of the region
made it a highly prized possession, and it was frequently invaded by
foreign armies in the 17th and 18th centuries. During the Napoleonic Wars
(1799-1815), Bavaria was made a kingdom by Napoleon. In the 19th century,
Bavaria tended to support Austria against Prussia. After being defeated with
Austria in the Seven Weeks' War (1866), however, Bavaria sided with Prussia
and in 1871 joined the new German Empire. After World War I (1914-1918)
a Communist-led group belonging to the Independent Socialist party seized
power, but troops of the central government assisted by Bavarian volunteers
crushed the rebellion. In the 1920s Bavaria was able to retain a large degree
of autonomy, which it lost in the 1930s with the rise of Adolf Hitler. Munich
became the headquarters of the National Socialist (Nazi) party during the
Hitler regime. After World War II (1939-1945) Bavaria was included in the
United States Zone of Occupation. A new constitution was drawn up in 1946,
and in 1949 Bavaria became a constituent state of West Germany. In 1990,
West and East Germany united and became the Federal Republic of Germany.

END

