
Knowlton Township, Warren County, New Jersey
(extracted from the Internet)

BEGIN

Our History

The Lenni Lenape or Delaware Indians were the first inhabitants of New
Jersey with the highly respected Minsi tribe living in the northern region
along the Delaware River. Their westward departure around 1742 brought
the pre-revolutionary settlers to our area. Pioneer names such as Leida,
Snyder, Cool, Barnes, Craig, Brands, Bartow, Beck and Brugler, who settled the
northern end of the township, are still known today.  Establishing communities
in the southern portion of Knowlton were the Albertson, Adams, Applemon,
Engle, Robeson (after whom the Rift was named), Cummins, Ribble, Ramsey and
Allison families. "Knoll town", called so after the prevalent small hills
(some of which were limestone knobs), was sectioned from Oxford Township
and legally enacted during the 1768 session of the State Legislature. Up
until 1824, the township, bounded at the north by the Blue Mountains and to
the west by the Delaware River, was part of Sussex County. The formation
of Warren County, named after the Revolutionary War hero General Joseph
Warren who fell at Bunker Hill, placed the county seat at Belvidere. A
new western boundary was created when, in 1845, Blairstown deducted itself
from Knowlton Township. The Moravian Grist Mill, which now stands in Hope,
was built when the area was still Knowlton Township; the stones probably
taken from the nearby quarry.

The population in 1887 was estimated to be 2000 which supports the theory
that Delaware, Warrington, Hainesburg, Columbia, Polkville, Centerville,
and Ramseyburg were all flourishing communities. The interwoven histories
of the ever-growing churches in the area also clearly show this. As the
several factories, mills, tanneries, quarries, and ultimately, the railroads
disappeared over the years, the setting become a residential one where some
farming continued.

Today, except for the small, private businesses and a number of farms,
Knowlton Township is continuing its peaceful pace and hopefully maintaining
its beautiful countryside.

END

