
Friendsville, Susquehanna County, Pennsylvania

From the Irish Echo, Pennsylvania in 1982:

BEGIN

On the Borderline
A tour of Friendsville, Pa.
By Mick Helain
  Friendsville, Pa. -- Welcome to Friendsville, Pa.  The time, the first half
of the 1800s.  You're an Irish navvy out of work.  You emigrated to the shores
of America to help build the canals, the Chenango Canal through Binghamton
and the North Branch in Luzerne County, Pa.  Both jobs have been suspended.
There's no work for Paddy.  You hear rumors of a place called Friendsville
just south of Binghamton, and 12 miles to the west of Montrose on the New
Milford-Owego Turnpike where land can be had for a reasonable price.
  Being a cautious Irishman, you begin asking questions about this place,
Friendsville.  You are told that the man to talk to is Edward White, who
married the eldest sister of Gerald Griffin, a retired British officer,
in Limerick.  Edward White is the agent for the principal, Dr. R.H. Rose.
Edward carries on a farm in the area.  Edward White invites you to visit and
see for yourself just how it is in Friendsville.  You hem and haw trying
to think of one good reason not to go.  Finding no good reason not to,
you board the Friendsville Stage, which is meant to carry ten but recently
has been carrying 12 to 15 passengers to Friendsville.
  Mr. White meets you at the stage office in Friendsville with a horse
and wagon.  As you drive along the main street of the village, he points
out to you some of the places that other Irishmen have in the town, such
as Phil Ryan's hotel.  He points out the farms of the Keenans, the Flynns,
the Tierneys, the Reillys, the Hickeys, and the Lees, just to mention a few.
  He drives by St. Francis Xavier Church built in 1831.  He tells you of the
advertisement he himself placed in the Susquehanna Register in Montrose,
"Edward White will contract with a competent person for building a small
church in Friendsville in Susquehanna County.  He will supply all the
materials, the frame excepted ..."
  He drives toward Middleton.  On the way, he points out more Irishmen's
farms, James Ferris and Philip Finelly; Patrick Magee's, Walter O'Flanlin's,
John Murphy's.  He tells you John is called "Stone House" because his family
lives in a stone house.
  As you pass these farms, you are in awe by the size of them.  These are
not the small farms you remember in Ireland.  These are giants!  He shows
you the farms of Dennis McMahan, William Fennel, Edward Grimes, Michael
Cunningham, Joseph Tierney, Michael Whalen, James Melhuish, Michael Madden,
Thomas Colford, and John Burke.
  People are as friendly as they were at home.  Whenever you stop, they ask
you to have a drink and rest a bit.  As you are resting, Edward White tells
you about other Irishmen who are now living here.  He tell you about Farrell
Millmore who came from either Sligo or Roscommon to work on the canals much
like yourself.  He tells you about the Irish living on the road between
Wolf Road and North Branch.  Among these is James Curley who has five sons.
  This region was a dense forest when James Curley got there.  But he's
cleared five farms from it.  He tells you how Wolf Road got its name, by
the wolves travelling up and down it after it was staked out and partially
cleared.  He tells you that an occasional wolf can still be seen from time
to time returning to his haunts.  He says that John Fitzgerald lives along
Wolf Road.
  He mentions some other Irishmen you will meet.  Men such as James Cooney,
Michael Connaughton, Hugh McDonald, Daniel Farrell, Dennis Lane, Charles
Heavy, William Monihan (Monaghan), Edward Reilly and James Quigley.
  You decide then and there to become part of this thriving community.
With this decision you join other Irish settlers of the time by names of
Moran, Degnan, Brennan, Leary, Keough, McCormick and Gillan.  Also John
Conboy, John Flynn, John Horrigan, Patrick Smith and Patrick McDonogh.
  This may seem strange to one living in modern times.  It is hard to
visualize that less than twenty miles across the borderline (Pa line) that
it was still wilderness and virgin land in the 1800s.  Before A. Lincoln
thought of being president.  The most remarkable thing of it all is
that there are descendants of these original families still living here.
Just look at the names of the workers at this Friendsville festival and you
will probably come across a good many of the original families, such as the
Conboys, the Guitons, the Maddens, the Monaghans, the Flynns, the Keenans,
the O'Donnells, the Morans, the McCormicks, the Degnans, the Brennans,
the Gillans, the Keoughs, the Whalens, the Fitzgeralds, and the McMahans.
  There are off-shoots of these families and other families that came
to Friendsville at a later date.  These are the Thaynes, the Dolans, the
Feheleys, the Shaughnesseys, the Powers etc.
  These people are proud of their heritage.  They are also proud of
Friendsville and St. Francis Xavier Church.  They return once a year on
the July 4th weekend to attend the parish picnic.
  There is a wealth of historical and trivial information which one could use
for an entire book on the area.  Some humorous and some sad.  Among them are:
  The borough of Friendsville, 12 miles from Montrose on an old New Milford
to Owego Turnpike which forms the principle street of the village.  It owes
its origin and name to the purpose of Dr. R. H. Rose to found a village
for the members of the Society of Friends (Quakers), whom he had induced
to settle on his land in this locality.  In 1819, he set aside a tract
of land, three-quarters of a mile long and half as wide, along the above
named highway, which was laid into village lots and called Friendsville.
A few of the Friends (Quakers) coming at that period settled within these
bounds, but most of them lived in the surrounding country and had this
place as their business center.
  In 1886, not quite 200 inhabitants, a Catholic Church, three stores,
two public houses and several large mechanic shops.
  The village was incorporated by an act of the legislature in 1848.
  At the Lee store is kept the Friendsville Post Office, in charge of
E. E. Lee since October, 1885.
  The graveyard connected with the church is large and well-kept.  Here repose
some of the early Catholic pioneers, including members of the White family,
and Patrick and Ellen Griffin.  They were the parents of the gifted Gerald
Griffin, the Irish novelist, and of Mrs. Edward White.
 The foregoing notes are compliments of the Rev. Francis O'Malley, past
[sic] of St. Francis Xavier's Church in friendsville.  Father O'Malley is
originally from the Providence section of Scranton.  His dog, "Shannon"
isn't from Bangor.
  There are only approximately 100 hundred families connected with the
parish but they are willing workers.  As this festival will attest to at
its successful conclusion.
  The inducements of Dr. Rose weren't the only things that lured the Irish to
this part of the country.  Gaze around you as you drive through this area.
There are still stone fences to be seen and the brush overgrows the road
in spots.  Look down in the valley across from the church, even today it
looks like someone stole it right out of Ireland.  The only thing missing
is the smell of the heather and the primroses.  This is one of the reasons
this part of country is called God's Country.  It's the nearest thing to
Ireland and Heaven.
  This writer apologizes for taking liberties with the history of Friendsville
and St. Francis Xavier's Church.  Being a first-generation American he has
difficulties in imagining that people's ancestors were living here when
James Madison, Taylor, John Quincey Adams, and other names that appeared in
history lessons were occupying the "White House".  Also, that in Ireland on
September 15, 1865, Thomas Luby, a Fenian leader was arrested along with
John O'Leary and Jeremiah O'Donovan Rossa.  About the same time, a Thomas
Lucy is settling down in Friendsville.  The writer also reflected on the
"Penal laws" which England imposed on Ireland around the early 1800s, and
the Potato Famine of the 1840's.  By combining all these historical events
in proper perspective, one is able to see even today, the advantages offered
these immigrants from Ireland.
  Also, if a generation is approximately 20 years, then some of these
families from Friendsville go back 8 generations.  It staggers one's mind
when you think that they are still there not only in their own hometown
but even possibly on the original homestead for their ancestors.
  That's for "The Borderline" from the Pennsylvania side of it anyway.
The next time it will be back across the border in NYS.  Take care of yourself
and your Galway Shawl until the next time.  Until then send your bon-mots to
Mick Heslin, 133 Chapin Street, Apt. #4, Binghamton, NY 13905 (607) 722-8055.

unquote

